+++
title = "Christian Freedom According to Galatians, Luther, and the Westminster Confession"
author = "James Cooper"
date = "2017-01-04"
categories = ["Papers"]
tags = ["luther", "galatians", "law and gospel", "westminster standards", "two kinds of righteousness", "christian freedom"]
+++

In this essay, I will demonstrate that freedom from the Law does not undermine holiness in the believer, but in fact necessitates it. To accomplish this, I will first establish the doctrine of Christian freedom in Scripture itself, focusing primarily on Galatians 2. Then I will address the charge of antinomianism by examining the doctrine of sanctification in historical perspective, with particular attention given to Luther’s 1519 *Sermon on Two Kinds of Righteousness* and the Westminster Confession of Faith. Lastly, I will consider the enduring significance of a true doctrine of Christian freedom for life in the church today.

The first mention of freedom in Galatians occurs in 2:4. Paul refers to “false brothers” who had come to Jerusalem in order to bring them from freedom into slavery. Within the immediate context, the pressing issue seems to have been the matter of the Gentile circumcision, but not *merely* circumcision itself. As Schreiner notes, it is likely that in eating with Gentiles (2:12), Peter actually consumed unclean foods.[^1] Peter’s withdrawal from the Gentiles under pressure from the circumcision party thus signaled that, in order to enjoy full fellowship with the Apostles, Gentiles must live like Jews. This included the observation of circumcision, and by extension the whole Torah.[^2] Paul’s rebukes Peter in 2:14. If Peter, who formally lived according to the Torah[^3] no longer believed himself bound to live according to it (as evidenced by his previous conduct), how could he demand that Gentiles, who had never observed the Torah, now live according to it? Schreiner notes that Paul’s use of the word “compel” (ἀναγκάζεις) forges a link between Peter and the false brothers who had earlier threatened the believer’s freedom and the truth of the gospel.[^4]

Paul’s encounter with the false brothers and confrontation with Peter form the background for 2:15—21, in which Paul directly contrasts justification through works of the Law and faith in Christ. Paul turns the table on his opponents in 2:18, reversing the charge that those who no longer live as Jews are sinning (2:17).[^5] On the contrary, it is those who rebuild what is torn down, namely works of the Law, that are transgressors. In the realm of justification, works of the Law and faith in Christ are antithetical principles. To affirm justification by works of the Law is in effect to deny faith, and to sin against God by rejecting his appointed means of righteousness.[^6] The statement of 2:20 is obscure, but likely refers to the way in which Christ, born under the Law, redeemed those under the Law (4:4).[^7] In any case, the antithesis is strengthened. Paul died to the Law, and now lives to God by faith in Jesus (2:20).

I have thus far traced Paul’s argument against the Judaizers, but what precisely does any of this have to do with freedom from the Law? Paul’s argument goes much further circumcision and food laws. At issue was not simply whether Gentiles were required to follow specific laws, but whether law keeping was required for righteousness at all.[^8] *Freedom in Christ means freedom from the Law as a means of righteousness before God*, whether the Law as it was specifically given to Israel through Moses or God’s general moral will, which the Mosaic Law was intended to express. Paul’s argument follows the particular contours of this early Jew-Gentile dispute, but the issues he addresses are basic to life as a creature in relationship to a morally righteous God.[^9]

Having defined Christian freedom as freedom from Law as a means of righteousness, an objection immediately arises, namely the charge of antinomianism. Whether for theological or psychological reasons, what motivation do those freed from the Law have to live according to God’s moral standards? The charge is an old one, going as far back as at least the early days of Protestantism, and is still common today.[^10] Douglass Campbell writes, “after reducing the condition of salvation from ethical perfection to faith alone, the theory cannot then consistently expect self-interested individuals to undertake further ethical behavior!”[^11] This statement is representative of objections to *sole fide* that have existed since the time of the Reformation, and betrays a deep misunderstanding of the history of Protestant thought even at its very beginnings. To demonstrate this, I will examine two representative writings from the Protestant tradition: Luther’s *Sermon on Two Kinds of Righteousness*, and the Westminster Confession of Faith.

Luther’s *Sermon on Two Kinds of Righteousness* was written in 1519, the same year as his first series of lectures on Galatians. Luther’s main text for the sermon was Philippians 2:5-6, which exhorts believers to mutual self-abasement on the model of Christ’s own incarnation. He begins by noting that Christians have two kinds of righteousness. The first he calls “alien and infused from outside of oneself.”[^12] To illustrate, Luther uses the image of a marriage. The bridegroom possesses all that is the bride’s and vice-versa. In the same way, that which properly belongs to Christ, namely his righteousness, and even Christ himself, belongs to the believer by faith.[^13] The analogy of marriage is fitting, for Luther continues, saying that the believer is “attached to” and “one” with Christ, making it “impossible for sin to remain in that person.”[^14] Christ’s righteousness becomes the “basis, the cause, the source of any own actual righteousness.” It replaces the original Adamic righteousness lost in the Fall and accomplishes even more than Adam could have.[^15] This righteousness of Christ, which justifies *and* sanctifies, grows and is finally perfected in death.[^16] The second kind of righteousness, that which properly belongs to the human subject, is thus an overflow of the first. Luther refers to it as a “product…fruit and consequence” of the first kind, citing Galatians 5:22.[^17] This second kind of righteousness “complete\[s\]” the first by “extinguish\[ing\] the old Adam.” It “hates itself and loves its neighbor.” This kind of righteous person Luther calls a “spiritual person,” meaning one “whose very existence depends on faith in Christ”.[^18]

This expulsive power of the first kind of righteousness is a consistent theme within traditional Protestantism, captured a century later, though in different terms, by the Westminster divines. In their statement on sanctification, the divines wrote, “\[t\]hey, who are once effectually called, and regenerated, having a new heart, and a new spirit created in them, are further sanctified, really and personally, through the virtue of Christ’s death and resurrection, by His Word and Spirit dwelling in them.”[^19] There are clear parallels between the statement of the divines and Luther’s earlier work. What Luther refers to as the infusion of a new righteousness in us, the divines refer to as the giving of a new heart and spirit in regeneration.[^20] This results in a real and personal, rather than a fictional or abstract, righteousness, which the believer enjoys by “virtue of Christ’s death and resurrection,” that is, an alien righteousness. The Confession continues, “the dominion of the whole body of sin is destroyed, and the several lusts thereof are more and more weakened and mortified; and they more and more quickened and strengthened in all saving graces.”[^21] This process Luther described as the extinguishing of the old Adam unto perfection.

These two works, in unique and mutually enforcing ways, demonstrate the necessary relationship between justification *sola fide* and the holiness of the believer. Luther’s account grounds this holiness more concretely in the believer’s union with Christ, preferring to view even the believers’ holiness through the lens of Christ’s own righteousness as it is appropriated by the believer by faith throughout his entire life. The Westminster divines prefer the perspective of the Spirit’s work in regenerating and sanctifying the believer. These are not, in the end, exclusive construals of the process of sanctification, and together prove the falsity of the charge of antinomianism. In the first place, it is clear that, according to Luther and the Confession, that Campbell’s “self-interested” believer does not exist. He exists in part, but this self-interest, the old Adam which resists holiness, is extinguished as the Spirit continues to work in the believer, conforming him more and more to the image of Christ. The new heart is not interested in itself, but the object of its new affection, namely Christ, and in its neighbors. This new affection and resulting growth in holiness are first and foremost a work external to the believer, grounded in the finished justifying work of Christ, and continuing through the work of the Spirit throughout the believer’s life. As an external work of God, sanctification is thus *necessary* as the second part of a twofold work of Christ in the life of the believer. One can no more separate justification from sanctification than one can separate the believer from Christ, or undo the work of the Spirit. The antinomian charge, and antinomianism itself, fail precisely because they try to effect such a separation.

The right relationship between freedom and holiness is of perennial significance in the church. Just as there have always been those who reject *sola fide*, there have also always been those who abuse it. Those who claim Christian freedom and live lives which dishonor both God and neighbor actually reject and despise the Spirit’s work, as well as the savior who bought them. The church should be a place of grace, but never a haven for unrepentant and spiritually indifferent people. To overlook sin is actually to confuse the two kinds of righteousness, acting according to the first kind when the second is so clearly lacking. But this neither comports with New Testament example nor the logic of necessity which Luther and the Confession so clearly lay out.

Secondly, this relationship implies that pastors should never seek to motivate holiness by presenting it as a means of attaining righteousness before God. Appealing to such mercenary impulses may be attractive and produce short term results, but it is the work of the old Adam in the pastor and in those who respond. Rather, pastors should seek to cultivate the work of the Spirit already working in the hearts of true believers. This surely includes instruction, but instruction not from the hand of the judging Law-giver, but the gracious Father who both justifies and aids us in doing those very things which please Him.

I have outlined the Scriptural foundation for Christian freedom. I have also demonstrated that the charge of antinomianism is historically and theologically false. Lastly, I have noted some implications of the doctrine for life in the church today. (2494 words)

[^1]: See the discussion Thomas R. Schreiner, *Galatians*, Exegetical Commentary on the New Testament (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2010), 141—42.

[^2]: This seems to be Paul’s reasoning in Galatians 5:3. The issue of whether Paul had in mind the entire Law, or only certain parts of it, has become a hotly debated point in recent decades. I have assumed the traditional view that in referring to Law or the works of the Law, Paul has in mind the entirety of the Mosaic Law, not only its ceremonial aspects. See the discussion in Schreiner, 157-59, and especially the commentaries of Luther and Calvin, for the “traditional” view.

[^3]: To live as a Jew meant, simply, to keep the Jewish Law, including those portions which distinguished Jews from Gentiles. It was natural, then, that certain facets of the Law would prove more controversial than others as the gospel spread outward to the Gentiles. See Schreiner, 147.

[^4]: Schreiner, 147.

[^5]: On the particulars of Paul’s argument, see J.B. Lightfoot, *St. Paul’s Epistle to the Galatians* (Lynn, MA: Hendrickson Publishers, 1981), 117.

[^6]: Shreiner, 170.

[^7]: Schreiner, 171.

[^8]: In this sense, discussions of what laws were included in “works of the Law” are somewhat beside the point. To insist on *any* law for righteousness is to substitute the principle that righteousness comes by faith with an entirely different principle. This is why Paul says in 5:4 that circumcision makes one liable to the whole Law.

[^9]: It is for this reason that it will simply not do to dismiss Luther, as some modern New Testament scholars have done, by claiming his exegesis was driven by a need to read his own contemporary circumstances back into the text. In his 1519 lectures on Galatians, written early in his career, Luther shows an attentiveness to the particularities of the Galatian situation. Regardless of one’s opinion on the soundness of his exegesis, in his comments on Galatians 310, Luther attempts to demonstrate that Paul was not speaking only of the Ceremonial Law, a category Luther was clearly aware of, but of Law more generally, as it applied both to Jews *and* Gentiles. See N. T. Wright, *What Saint Paul Really Said* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1997), 19; James D.G. Dunn, “The justice of God: a renewed perspective on justification by faith,” *Journal of Theological Studies* ns 43.1 (April 1992): 1-22; Martin Luther, *Lectures on Galatians, 1—6, 1519*, ed. Jaroslav Pelikan, trans. Richard Jungkuntz, Luther’s Works 27 (Saint Louis: Concordia, 1955), 256-57.

[^10]: For recent scholarly engagement with this objection see R. Michael Allen, *Justification and the Gospel* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2013). 128-29. Allen is responding to the work of Douglass Campbell, who believes that the traditional Protestant understanding of justification undermines sanctification.

[^11]: Douglass Campbell, *The Deliverance of God* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans: 2009), 81, quoted in Allen, 129.

[^12]: *Prima est aliena et ab extra infusa.* See Martin Luther, “Sermon on Two Kinds of Righteousness,” in *Word and Faith,* ed. Kirsi I. Stjerna, trans. Else Marie Wiberg Pedersen, The Annotated Luther, Volume 2 (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2015), 13 n. 8.

[^13]: Luther, *Sermon on Two Kinds of Righteousness,* 13-14.

[^14]: Ibid., 15.

[^15]: Ibid. Luther’s views on Adam’s original state are beyond the scope of this essay, but it is worth noting that in this way of thinking, Christ’s work undoes and even completes what is lost in the fall.

[^16]: Ibid., 16.

[^17]: Ibid.

[^18]: Ibid., 16—17. Luther’s identification of “spirit” in Galatians 5:22 with the spiritual person rather than the Spirit of Christ is unfortunate, though Luther seems to acknowledge the work of the Spirit soon after in his citation of John 3:6.

[^19]: *The Westminster Confession of Faith and Catechisms* (Lawrenceville, GA: Christian Education & Publications, 2007), WCF, 13.1.

[^20]: We should not, of course, expect a perfect parallel, not least because Luther’s sermon was never intended to be a confessional statement, nor even a precise statement of his own personal theology. It should also note that this sermon occurs early in Luther’s career, whereas the Westminster Confession was the work of a mature body of divines writing over a century later.

[^21]: Ibid.
