+++
title = "Building Golden Calves (Exodus 32:1–10)"
author = "James Cooper"
date = "2018-10-09"
categories = ["Sermons"]
tags = ["Exodus","idolatry"]
+++

*The following message was delivered on October 9, 2018 to the students
of Clapham School in Wheaton, Illinois.*

Good morning again Clapham School. It is my pleasure to continue on with
you in our series on the priesthood, and as we press forward with our
current topic, “approaching a holy God.” Last week we looked at the role
of tabernacle and the priesthood in the life of God’s people, and spent
some time reflecting on what it would have been like to be so close, but
not too close, to a holy God. We concluded by remembering our great high
priest, Jesus, who gives us an access to God hinted at, but never
realized by the saints of old. The passage we read last week came from
Exodus 28, which takes place not while the tabernacle was in place, but
before. Before the tabernacle could be built, two things had to happen.
The first happened in Exodus 24, when God’s people made solemn promises
to obey God’s commandments, and the second was that God had to give
Moses instructions. He did this over a period of 40 days and 40 nights,
during which Moses was on top of a mountain away from the people, and
our passage today come right at the end of those 40 days. Please turn
with me to Exodus 32, and as we read the passage together, I want you to
ask yourself the question, “where is God?” \[**Read Ex 32:1–10**\].

It’s easy to get lost in the strangeness of this passage. After all, who
of us knows people that do this kind of thing? Who builds a cow out of
gold and worships it like it’s God? Even if we do know or are familiar
with people like that, surely no *true* follower of the *true* God would
do this. So the inner voice of condemnation goes. But I want us to
remember that back in Exodus 24, these same people made solemn promises
to God \[**read Ex 24:3**\]. There is no hint in the text that the
people were being anything but sincere. As far as we can tell, up until
this moment in the story, these believers in the God of Jacob, Isaac,
and Abraham, were the real deal. So what happened?

Remember last week that we were imagining the Exodus from Egypt as the
never-ending camping trip. We’re in the wilderness, without any of our
stuff except for a tent and whatever food we can carry with us. We have
no map, we have no idea where we are going, but we have a guide. His
name is Moses and he talks to God. We saw him do *amazing* miracles back
in Egypt. We saw him raise his staff, and a sea spread apart down the
middle. God is with this man, and as long as he’s in charge, we’re
pretty sure everything is gonna be ok, because so far, everything has
been great. God wants us to obey all of his commandments? Sure thing,
Moses, sign me up.

But then, one day, Moses leaves us, to go talk to God. He’s gone for a
day. Whatever, we can sit tight for a day. He’s gone for two days,
whatever. Three days, whatever. A week…I wonder what he’s doing up
there? Two weeks, I really wonder what he’s doing up there. A month,
please come back Moses. Forty days, Moses isn’t coming back. Maybe he’s
dead, or maybe he, and maybe even God, have left us. That’s what the
people start to think. You can sense it in the way that they talk about
Moses. “As for this Moses, the man who brought us up out of the land of
Egypt, we do not know what has become of him.” That guy, Moses, who did
all that stuff for us and represented God, we don’t know where he is, so
Aaron, you have to build us a replacement. It’s insulting, both to Moses
and to God. It’s insulting to Moses because they talk about him like
he’s a stranger, and insulting to God, because instead of waiting, they
seek out His presence in exactly the way they said they would not just
40 days before.

It seems clear from the passage that the people *thought* they were
worshiping the one true God. Aaron make sure by steering it in that
direction. The golden calf *represents* the God who rescued them out of
Egypt, an unmistakable reference to the LORD, and they erect an altar to
make offerings to this image of the LORD, the same kinds of offerings
commanded back in chapter 20. They throw a feast, and the language of
the passage (they ate and drank and rose up to play) at least suggests
that they mixed in some pagan practices (probably things they picked up
in Egypt), but it was all directed towards the LORD, so it was fine
right? That’s what Aaron was hoping. But it wasn’t fine. The people
broke at least the second commandment in worshiping God through an
image, and quite possibly the first—commandments that God had *just
gave* them, and they had agreed to. And the LORD is furious,
understandably. He saw everything, and he tells Moses “go down to your
people,” and then “leave me alone that my wrath may burn, and I can make
a new people.” He tells Moses that his is so bad, he might as well just
start over. The camping trip is over, we failed, time for a new troop.

This isn’t the end of story, but I do want us to pause and think a
little bit about what we can learn from what we’ve seen so far. First of
all I hope we can see that as great as Moses was, he could *not* be all
that the people wanted him to be, namely, their assurance of God’s
presence. Many of you have strong Christians in your life; pastors,
parents’ friends—people whose faith inspires you and makes you think,
wow, God is *with* him or her, and therefore God is with me. But that
is, ultimately, an unsure foundation. We need to have our own
relationship with God, and not just borrow it from other people because
sometimes other people disappear either physically for time, or
spiritually, by having their own struggles with the faith.

Secondly, the specific activity that the Israelites undertook may seem
strange to us, but it came from a feeling that is not so strange to
us—fear, uncertainty, the question we asked at the very beginning, now
that Moses is gone, where is God? How can we find him? They didn’t not
believe in God anymore, they just wanted to know that God was with them.
They were afraid. Feeling abandoned by God can be a very frightening
thing. The last time I felt utterly abandoned by God was when I left for
college and had no friends, no parents, and no church to call home. I
felt utterly alone. It is a scary thing to know God is there, and then
not to know. If you haven’t experienced that yet, you probably will at
some point. And the temptation in those moments, is to try to find some
way, any way, to seek God’s presence, or at least something like it. The
temptation is to grab at whatever *we* feel will get that sense of God
back, whether or not God has promised to be present in that way or not,
whether or not God has *forbidden* us from seeking him in that way.

And the ironic thing in all of this is where was God this whole time? He
was *right there*, with Moses, on the mountain. He saw the whole thing.
He even gave them a giant cloud so that they would know he was still
there, but they refused to see it, because God was not with them in the
way that they wanted him to be with them. Now we’re digging a little
deeper. When we feel abandoned by God, we don’t just feel afraid, we can
also feel angry, or bitter with God, or with his people. “This Moses
guy, whatever, where is he now that I’m going through *x, y, z* in my
life.” “I know God promised to be with me, but clearly he’s not, so all
that stuff he said about living a holy life set apart from the world,
that must not work, because I don’t feel like it’s working.”

But God *was* at work. He was *right there*, on top of the mountain,
making plans with Moses for the tabernacle, so that he could be present
with them in a way that they had never seen before—in a way that should
have amazed them, if they had only had the patience to wait. And that is
how God works, much of the time, I might even dare to say that is how he
works *most* of the time. And if you want a God who gives you exactly
what you want when you want it, then you’ve got the wrong God, my
friend. This God is too glorious for that. His plans are amazing, and
they take time. So where is God when I feel abandoned, or lonely, or
even angry, bitter, and impatient? He’s right there, working, and he
wants you to wait. Don’t build a golden calf. Pray, and be patient.
