+++
title = "Why Follow the Path of Wisdom? (Proverbs 3:13â€“20)"
author = "James Cooper"
date = "2017-11-27"
categories = ["Sermons"]
tags = ["Proverbs","wisdom"]
+++

*The following message was delivered on November 11, 2017 to the students of Clapham School in Wheaton, Illinois.*

Good morning. I'm Mr. Cooper. Many of you, I'm sure, have seen me in
various places and various roles, but today it my distinct pleasure to
continue to lead us through God's word in the Book of Proverbs in these
next four weeks leading into Christmas. It has been a long Thanksgiving
break, so let me give just a brief reminder of where we've been. So far,
we've been imagining life as a long journey, a journey which most of you
have only just begun. And this journey of life is not so straightforward
at times. There are twists and turns, forks in the road, big decisions
and constant temptations that sometimes leave us feeling lost. "What
should I do?", and "Where am I going?" are very real questions that many
of you have asked, and I can guarantee all of you will ask as you
continue to grow. We've already met a few characters that have offered
answers to those questions---the father, the wicked---but perhaps the
most striking has been the character of Wisdom. The father of Proverbs
has invited us to follow the path of Wisdom, and today we're going to
ask again, **\[Big Question\]** "why follow the path of wisdom?" Keep
that question in mind as you turn with me to Proverbs, chapter 3, vv.
13---20 **\[Read Pr. 3:13---20\]**.

Let's turn our attention for a moment to verses 13---17. Here the father
of proverbs pronounces the one who gains wisdom and understanding
blessed. Why is he or she blessed? Because, he says, look at what it
gets you: gain better than silver, profit better than gold, something
more precious than jewels---all good things, but it gets even better.
One gains wisdom itself, something more desirable than anything else
worth desiring. Think, for a moment, of something, you really, really,
want---when I was your age, some of you, I really wanted Pokemon cards.
Wisdom is better even than that. That isn't to say, of course, that
other things aren't worth desiring or possessing. One of the benefits of
wisdom, as Mr. Barney has already shown us in vv. 1---11, is that it
tends to bring wealth, long life, and security. Indeed, vv. 16---17
affirm those very things \[**verbally enumerate the list of benefits in
vv. 16---17**\], but to desire the benefits without the thing itself is,
according to Proverbs, to completely miss the point.

Again, imagine we're on a journey, and we've got all the money in the
world and seventy years to spend it, but no map. We have no map because,
at the very beginning of the journey, someone offered us a map and we
said "no thank you, I've got this." But the father of Proverbs knows
that without wisdom, we haven't "got this." We have no sense of
direction, no wisdom about what to do a where to go. Those ten, twenty,
thirty, seventy years would go by, we'd have a lot of fun, get a lot
things, even lead what many might consider pretty pleasurable lives. But
we'd spend all of it wandering. And in the end, would we really get
anywhere? If I set out tomorrow to get to China, and I never get, there,
but I get a lot of cool things and meet a lot of cool people along the
way, have I really accomplished anything?

It seems a little silly to go on a journey without a map, and the author
of Proverbs would agree. He would also agree that this kind of wandering
about without any knowledge of where we're going is precisely what you
and I do when we set our heart's deepest longings and desires on the
things of this world rather than on the wisdom that comes from God.
Maybe it isn't gold or silver or jewels that you desire. Maybe it's
something else (good grades, fitting in, the iPhone X), but whatever it
is, if you allow that desire to drive you, it will drive you and drive
you all the way to nowhere in particular. Take the map.

"But isn't this all a bit mercenary?", you might ask. In other words,
doesn't this all just sound a bit too much like it's all about getting
the most benefit for me? "That doesn't sound all that holy", you might
say. I want to steer us away from that for two reasons. In the first
place, none of us, I think, would object to accepting the good gifts
which our mothers and fathers desire to give to us. In fact, we need
those gifts. We need God's gifts. It is our own sinfulness which leads
us to run after worldly things when our Father in heaven desires to give
us something as precious as wisdom, and *perhaps* many other things as
well.

Secondly, take a look with me again at vv. 18---20, and notice the
echoes here of God's creation of the world in Genesis 1. With wisdom God
created the heavens and the earth. With wisdom he set the clouds above,
and put them in order, so that the rain falls and the oceans fill. His
wisdom is woven in the very fabric of the world. It corresponds most
truly to the way things really are. It gives meaning and purpose to all
created things, including you and me. Human beings are creatures in a
created world, and when God made us many moons ago he set Adam and Eve
in a garden and gave them everything they needed to live fulfilled and
purposeful lives ordered by God's very own wisdom. The only thing they
couldn't do was eat the fruit of a single tree. And you know what
happened next, don't you? They ate it. They ate it because instead of
trusting in God's wisdom, instead of accepting the map that he had made
for their lives, they leaned on their own understanding; their own
self-interested version of good and evil. And God cut them off from the
tree of life. Here it is again in v. 18. The tree of life appears here
in connection with wisdom because it is precisely through God's wisdom,
through living the kind of life you were created for, that you will find
the destination you were created for: eternal life with God. So who do
you want to be? Do you want to be God's creation in God's world living
in God's way towards God's eternal home? Or do you want to be your own
creation, living in your own way, or maybe somebody else's way, towards
nowhere in particular.

God offers wisdom to you, here in the book of Proverbs, and in the rest
of this book we call the Bible, but first of all---supremely, he has
offered it to us in his Son. Wisdom begins with a vital, that is, a
life-giving relationship with God---the kind that only comes through
faith in Jesus Christ. Learning wisdom is hard. It takes many years of
hard labor, and there will be many temptations to simply give up that
you will have to conquer. But the God who made the heavens and the
earth, and who sent his only Son to die for you will also give you the
victory. I want to close us this morning with a reading from Revelation
chapter 2, written to Christians who had every reason in the world to
abandon the pursuit of God's own wisdom **\[Read Re 2:7\]**. That is
where we are headed, friends, so keep on moving.
