+++
title = "Life Under the Sun (Ecclesiastes 2)"
author = "James Cooper"
date = "2019-05-26"
categories = ["Sermons"]
type = "posts"
tags = ["Ecclesiastes","Wisdom"]
+++

*The following message was delivered on May 26, 2018 to the
congregation of [Trinity Prebyterian Church](https://www.trinityhinsdale.com/) in Hinsdale, Illinois. [click here for recording](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1fGuKToxol9q0OwXRhUfKmEyrekyIizxH)*

Ecclesiastes is one of those books of the Bible that, when you read it,
you almost wonder how it made it in. Maybe that's just me, but
especially in these first two chapters, it it just seems very bleak,
very depressing---so hopeless in fact, that it is easy to let the words
cross our eyes or come into our ears, without really hearing them. There
are other parts of the Bible that are much easier to understand and much
more encouraging after all. Maybe that isn't you at all today. Maybe you
came here, you've had a bad day, you've had a bad week, and when the
preacher of Ecclesiastes said "I hated life," and "all is vanity and a
striving after wind," you said "yes, that is exactly how I feel." Well
you are in good company because this man of God certainly meant what he
said and that is certainly how all of us feel, if we're honest, from
time to time.

In his book Either/Or, the 19th century Danish philosopher Soren
Kierkegaard provided an apt picture of the malaise that falls on a
culture or the despair that falls on an individual whose outlook on life
simply cannot help navigate the complexities of life. One of his
characters says,

> "Marry, and you will regret it; don't marry, you will also regret it;
> marry or don't marry, you will regret it either way. Laugh at the
> world's foolishness, you will regret it; weep over it, you will regret
> that too; laugh at the world's foolishness or weep over it, you will
> regret both. Believe a woman, you will regret it; believe her not, you
> will also regret it... Hang yourself, you will regret it; do not hang
> yourself, and you will regret that too; hang yourself or don't hang
> yourself, you'll regret it either way; whether you hang yourself or do
> not hang yourself, you will regret both. This, gentlemen, is the
> essence of all philosophy."

Kierkegaard may just be taking a dig at philosophy there, but I think
what he is really getting after are philosophies of life which leave us
feeling stuck and unhappy. The future is uncertain, so how can possibly
decide how to act? Add to this a list of bad past experiences and the
fact that most of us hate risk, and you have a recipe for indecision,
regret, and despair. How should I live knowing that I can't really know
what to expect? What if I waste a good portion of my life pursuing
something that isn't worth it? These are exactly the kinds of questions
the writer of Ecclesiastes was asking.

The Preacher, as he is called here, is obviously a man of some wealth
and learning. Traditionally he was thought to be King Solomon, but there
is no reason he has to be. All that is important is that all of his
wisdom and all of his wealth have allowed him to experience a lot, and
in chapter 2 he sets out with all of his wisdom and all of his wealth to
find out what life is all about. What can finally satisfy his soul? It
is important to note that he is testing things, as he says in verse 1.
He begins from a position of ignorance. Maybe pleasure will do the
trick---wine, women, pets, jewels, nature, music; all good things (maybe
not the concubines), but all, in the end fail to satisfy the preacher's
soul. No earthly pleasure can stand up to the question, "is this what
life is all about?"

I had a professor at seminary suggest to me that the millennial
generation (my generation, the selfie-generation, the ideal generation
to use in a sermon illustration) is not so into consuming goods so much
as consuming experiences, which I think is mostly fair. Talk to anyone
between the ages of 25 and 45 and you will probably pick up on some
cynicism about ostentatious displays of wealth and our "consumerist
culture." On the other hand, talk to that same person about a new
restaurant or coffee shop or brewery or bakery or specialty grocery
store or an Instagram page that features all of these things and more,
it is a completely different conversation. Let's not forget the
technology that fuels a lot of this experience either. Gadgets differ
from other luxuries only in their justification. They are practical.
Please don't hear me judging anyone's particular purchase, I'm just
saying that the more things change, the more they stay the some,
including the sense of disappointment the preacher felt when nothing he
bought was able to make him feel satisfied. He didn't keep anything away
from himself, and the pleasure was its own reward in verse 10. In other
words, once it was done, that was it. And the feeling of spending all
this energy and all this work and all of this hope for a full life on
things that in the end left only a memory---that was like gaining
nothing at all, and he says so (v. 11).

And perhaps you relate to that. Perhaps you've been working hard, 9 to
5, 5 to 9 even, truly toiling for dreams and goals, maybe even things,
for you or for those you love that you hope will satisfy you. If you can
obtain it, then all the toil will pay off. The preacher says, maybe.
Probably not. And you probably already suspect this or know it to be
true. So the preacher turns away. If pleasure doesn't get me the
satisfaction I want, how else then should I live? How about living
wisely?

In verses 12--17 the preacher tries on wisdom. Keep in mind here that in
the Bible wisdom is not intelligence or skill or good sense generally.
Biblical wisdom is roughly equivalent to godliness. It is skill in the
art of godly living, to put it like one of my old professors. Walking
with integrity the way God would have us is what the preacher considers,
and at this point we would expect the big finale. That would make sense.
The preacher figures out that living for pleasure and working hard to
buy more things gets you nowhere so what you really need to do is live
the way God tells you to live and that's what will really get you the
satisfaction you want. That's what we expect both because it makes good
rhetorical sense and because that sounds like something a religious
person would say. In fact that sounds like something the Bible would
say. And we wouldn't be totally wrong. The Book of Proverbs has a strong
message that when we walk in God's ways things generally turn out
better. But's it's no guarantee, and the preacher will go more into that
later, but here, something else comes to his mind. Notice in v. 14 that
he makes a subtle reference to death. It is the one event that happens
to all of us whether we follow God's will or not. It is the guarantee
that all of our efforts will come to an end, and so will our memory.

One of the major themes in the ancient world, present in all kinds of
ancient literature, not just the Bible, was the problem of being
remembered. That's why kings built statues of themselves or monuments of
their reigns. Its why poets sang songs of heroes and ages long past. Its
why we keep pictures of our grandparents and our parents and hope that
our children will keep pictures and stories of us too. But nobody
remembers those ancient kings and heroes, not really. Just bits and
pieces and legends. Nobody knows what Ramses II looked like, felt like,
sounded like. Whether he was fun at parties or had a nice smile. Some
biographers are better than other for sure, but there are always things
missing, even in Lincoln's massive biography. And you and I are no
Abraham Lincoln's. History will forget us when we're gone, and the
absurdity of it all makes you wonder, is it worth it? Is it worth living
for God when death will wipe me and the memory of me and the memory of
those who remember me from the earth? After all, living a godly life
isn't easy. It requires a lot of self-denial, self-control, and
self-sacrifice. Temptations abound, and even if pleasure won't
ultimately satisfy, if I'm going to die anyway? Quest for satisfaction
over.

Well I've painted a rather bleak picture, and you can see why in v. 17,
the preacher says he hated life. And perhaps that comes as a bit of a
shock to you. I thought this man was godly? So why does he sound so much
like me?

Some of the times I've hated life the most have been during major life
transition, two of which I can think of off the top of my head and one
I'm going through right now. The worst was probably. the transition for
high school to college (so outgoing seniors watch out!). I distinctly
remember being 18 years old off on my own for the first time in a city a
long way away. My dorm was on the 9th floor an I remember being by
myself staring out the window onto this vast University of Minnesota
campus and feeling empty. It was like death---maybe; I was 18 after all.
And the reason I felt that way was because I wondered, what would become
of my past life? Was it over? I didn't think this at the time but
another natural question would have been was it worth it? Did it matter
who I kind to or unkind to in high school. Did it matter that I had
worked harder than maybe I even needed to. Did it matter that I spent
two years invested in a church that now I was no longer a part of. Would
anyone remember me? The answer turned out to be no. Not literally of
course, but practically speaking, that season of my life with those
particular relationships is over, and no one really talks about it.

And all of us experience these kinds of things, these little deaths that
make us question whether it all matters in the end. It kills the spirit
and makes us indifferent to God. Maybe we don't live for pleasure, we're
too cynical for that, but we don't really live for God either, and you
could substitute God for any number of higher causes that seem futile.
We just exist. We're like Kierkegaard's philosopher, or Marcus Aurelius
struggling in the morning.

Marcus Aurelius was a Roman emperor, and he writes in his *Meditations*
about the experience of getting out of bed. Like with most men this
could be a very trying experience sometimes. Now as far as I can tell,
he wasn't struggling with an existential crisis, just plain old
laziness, but the result was the same. Groggy indecision and a
half-hearted conviction that maybe he should do the right thing, but
maybe it wasn't worth it. Well Marcus had this advice for himself, he
essentially appealed to duty. "What is wrong with you? Aren't you so
privileged? You actually get to choose to hit snooze in the morning.
Don't you know that there are shopkeepers and road crews out there who
get up even earlier than you do and don't complain. And you, who run a
country, can't even be bothered to get out of bed." That's a paraphrase,
but barely. Maybe some of us really do need that advice some days,
especially for that particular struggle, but the appeal to duty is a
popular response both among Christians and increasingly among
non-Christians, especially younger men who are disillusioned by what
modern culture has to offer them.

But the call to duty rings hollow at the graveside. There is in fact no
room in a duty-bound system for mourning, for weeping, for hating life.
But that's exactly what the preacher does. And it seems like that's what
we're meant to do, too. This is meant to be instructive, after all, and
what he says rings so true to what many of experience in the low points
of life, if we're honest with ourselves when we go through them. And I
just want to encourage you if you're here and you struggle to fully
experience the awfulness of life, that if the way you lean into life
goes beyond optimism and you are actually afraid to admit when things
are wrong and somehow you think weeping and moaning are unmanly or
ungodly, the preacher and the psalmist are your example of godly men who
sometimes hated life, even though they never hated God, and that is a
crucial distinction to maintain. Maybe some of you do hate God for what
has is happened or is happening to you. That's not what the preacher is
saying, though it might look like it.

I've decided out of mercy to skip vv. 18--23 today. Joking aside, it is
an elaboration on the same theme. What is the point of building a future
for children who might disappoint us in the end? There's not much more I
want to say about that other than, "good point." Verse 24, however,
marks a major turning point. Here's the payoff, and on a first read, it
is easy to be somewhat confused underwhelmed. These verses don't seem to
fit. They seem like an anticlimax. They seem too ordinary, and I think
the extent to which they seem this way is the extent to which you and I
hold a differing view of life and death from that of the preacher.

There is a way in which the preacher's life parallels of human being
after Eden. Think with me, if you will back to Genesis, and what it
would have been like for Adam and Eve. Prayer, work, rest. Prayer, work,
rest. Day after day after day, enjoying the fruits of one's labors, the
beauty of the created word, and the intimate presence of God in all
things. Season gave way to season, and time was not an enemy but a
friend, bringing order and change, but not death and decay. Pleasure was
pleasurable, a gift rather than a master, and it pointed us to the
goodness of a God who walked in the garden as a friend.

Change was a part of this old world, but death was not a part; futility
was not; sin was not; emptiness was not; melancholy longing for
something more was not. All of these things are foreign to this this old
world, but they fit right at home in ours. That is why the preacher
hates life under the sun. To be under the sun means to be in a world
that was not meant to be, and it's terrible. Don't be afraid to admit
that. But at the same time, don't despair either.

I think we can begin to see how these last few verses fit into the
bigger story the preacher is telling. Vv. 24--28 reenactment in some
small way of that original Edenic life that all of us long for even if
we can't fully articulate it. To toil in the presence of God is to work
hard and to enjoy the pleasures of life while we have them. It is to
lean into the relationships and the communities and the commitments we
have where we are and while we have them. It is to lean into the present
unburdened by the terrible things that very well could happen to us, or
even the good things that very well might not---because we were not
created to be satisfied by the things of this world, and we will
certainly not be satisfied by a fallen world. That might be a little
disappointing, but it is ultimately freeing. It is to give up control
and to experience life as God has given it to us and not as we wish it
to be; to really mourn in times of mourning, and to really rejoice in
times of rejoicing. It is to view life as a gift rather than a quest for
satisfaction.

In the school I teach at, we read a lot of Charlotte Mason, who was a
19th century educational reformer. She wrote a lot about children, and
one of the things she warns parents about is the propensity to always be
thinking about the next stage, and I get that. Benjamin is a bit over a
year old now, and I worry about things like, "is he going to be walking
soon," or "where will he go to school," or "when will he make a
profession of faith, or"where will he go to college\" or "will he grow
up and remember his old man," and I'm not even that old! And as I'm
sitting there wondering all of this, I realize that I haven't even
looked at my son for the last twenty minutes. There's something not
quite right about that, and I think it gets a little bit at what it
means to toil the presence of God; it's about enjoying the lot in life
that God has given you, and letting him take you through. And it is a
little scary.

The passage ends on a note that sounds a bit like judgement, and it kind
of is, because after all, death is a result of sin, and death still
comes. And for those who don't know God, death is the end, and the godly
experience a kind of triumph. God's justice prevails. This ending serves
as a kind guarantee. If we are to give up control, how do we know we can
trust God? I can delay gratification for a long time, but can I have
something? For the preacher, it was the promises given to Abraham and
the assurance that in the end God and his people would triumph over sin,
death, and their enemies. For us, it is all these things, and the
triumph we have already experienced in Christ. We know the end of the
story. We know that death does not win in the end. We know that one day
Christ will return in judgement to make all things new and mourning we
feel now will be forgotten and the rejoicing multiplied. In Christ we
are forgiven, we are satisfied, we are free to live life under the sun.
