+++
title = "Life in the Time Between the Times (Jn 15:26—16:4)"
author = "James Cooper"
date = "2017-05-29"
categories = ["Sermons"]
tags = ["John", "eastertide"]
+++

Delivered at the [Villages of St. Peters](http://www.vofsp.com/) in St. Peters, Missouri on May 28, 2017. [click here for recording](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B_fmE7Mo2KD0b0hrNF9oVnF4a28)

Good morning. Again my name is James Cooper. I am a recent graduate of Covenant Seminary here in St. Louis, and it is my privilege to deliver God’s word to you this morning. The text we will be looking at today comes from John’s gospel, chapter 15, and is situated right in the middle of what is sometimes called the “Upper Room Discourse.” This was a period in Jesus’ ministry, really an extended speech, which started in John 13 and spans all the way through chapter 17. It begins like this **[Read Jn 13:1]**. This was in fact Jesus’ last meal with his disciples, and much of what he says in these chapters has to do with what life will be like for him in the days leading up to his death, and what life will be like for them in those days and beyond. [Big Question] What will life be like after Jesus’ death? We will pick up at 15:26. **[Read Jn 15:26—6:4]**

I want us to imagine for a moment what it would have been like to follow Jesus around during his earthly ministry. Imagine the confusion when we first met him. Who is this man that says all these cryptic things about the Kingdom of God, and performs all of these wonderful miracles that seem to confirm that he is in fact at least a prophet from God, if not something more. In those early days when Jesus faced little opposition we probably would have felt pretty good. Sure there was the occasional run in with religious leaders, but somehow Jesus always managed to come out on top, and the crowd was always with him. We’re all aligned with the right guy, the popular one, the winning team. If you’ve been a Christian very long, you’ve probably felt that way, maybe very early in your life with the Lord. There are times in all of our lives when particular experiences we’ve had or particular circumstances in the environment around us make it easier (notice I didn’t say easy) to be a follower of Jesus. It is easier to be a Christian when we feel particularly blessed, or when others commend us for the lives we lead.

So we’re following along with Jesus for a while. He seems like a pretty popular guy, and then one day he starts to say some crazy things. He starts to predict his own death. He starts to say that everything we thought about the trajectory of his life is wrong, that he’s going to be put to death by those same people he’s always managed to elude, and the crowd, which only ever seemed to half-understand him anyway, they’re all going to hate him. And us, they’re going to hate us too. That’s what he says in chapter 15, just before the verses we read. The world, by which John means the great mass of humanity that is touched by sin and unable to render to God the proper love and honor and obedience that is His, this world will hate Jesus and it will hate you. Is that really unbelievable? Is it really unbelievable that if you told someone that everything they believe about God and themselves and their need to be forgiven by placing their trust in a crucified and risen God who lives and reigns and will one day come again to judge the living and the dead—that if you told them that they might not like you? And yet as Christians that’s exactly what we’re called to do; to bear witness.

This idea of witness appears prominently in the first two verses of our text. Jesus says firstly that the Holy Spirit will bear witness to him, and secondly that his disciples will bear witness to him. We see this play out most memorably in the book of Acts chapter 2, on the day of Pentecost, when the disciples were all gathered together, and the Holy Spirit was poured out in a very dramatic and visible way, testifying to the truth of their witness about Jesus, and actually enabling them to be understood by all who were there. And the Spirit continued to work in the lives of Christ’s followers, and in the life the church—guiding, directing, building.

This word from Jesus about the Spirit comes in an interesting place in Jesus speech. It almost feels like an interruption. He’s just talked about the way in which his disciples would be hated, and in 16:1 he picks that up again, doesn’t he? **[Read Jn 16:1–3]** We almost want to say, “enough already! I get it.” Many of us do get it, and maybe we don’t even want to think about it, because it’s too painful. Many of us have lost relationships, friends, maybe even jobs, because of what we believe. Many of us look with fear at the future, perhaps for ourselves, perhaps for those after us. What will life be like for a Christian twenty-five or fifty years from now? What about all our brothers and sisters around the world who are killed day after day after day, in numbers we can’t even count. Some of us don’t want to hear Jesus’ words because they are hard, but most of us know they are true. If you’re not a Christian and you’re here today, I don’t want to lie to you. I don’t want to tell you that being a Christian is easy. It won’t make you popular. Much of the time, it won’t be obvious that you’re on the winning team. But Jesus doesn’t leave us, and you if you’ll trust him, to despair.

Jesus knows that life will be hard for his followers. He acknowledges this in 16:1—3. He knows that time and time again his disciples will be tempted to fall away, and he knows exactly why. He knows that they were going to be thrown out of the synagogue, the only real community they had known since they were children. He knows that you’re going to have to have that hard conversation with that family member or friend that may end your relationship. He knows that you might have to take that hard stand for the sake of integrity at work that may get you fired. And when that happens, v. 4, he wants you to remember that he knows. When he is gone these kinds of things will happen to you, because, whereas before  when he was here in the flesh, the scorn could be placed on him, now that he is absent, it must fall on those who, in their striving to be like him, look like him. He knows that. Which is why he doesn’t leave us without a helper.

The helper here refers to the Holy Spirit, which for many of us, is a rather confusing thing. But in fact, he is not a thing at all, he is a he. He is a person. He is God himself, and he is our helper. Christ did not want his disciples, or any of us, to have unrealistic expectations about life following him. That would simply lead to disillusionment and falling away. None of us like unexpected and painful surprises. On the other hand, he wanted his disciples to know, and you and I to know, not only that he knows our trials, but also that he has not in fact abandoned us. Christ is risen, this we celebrated a few weeks ago on Easter, and he now reigns with the Father in heaven, having defeated all the powers of death, and sin, and Satan, and one day he will return to end all off the suffering and oppression in this world, some of which you feel in your own lives. But in the meantime, in this time between the times, he has sent his Holy Spirit, this helper, to be with us. God is present and active in this world. The disciples saw this in an amazing way at Pentecost, when the Spirit was poured out and many, against all expectation, came to a saving knowledge of the Lord Jesus. And that same Spirit is at work today. It may not seem so obvious at times, but God is with you, in his Spirit, advocating for you, witnessing along with your witness, softening hearts to hear the gospel and be persuaded by this message of ours which seems so offensive. The Spirit of Christ is at work building his church, and the gates of hell will not prevail against it, Christ says in Matthew 16. So don’t be surprised when persecution comes, but also don’t be surprised to see the ways in which God is still working in this world, and will work definitively on that great day, when Christ returns and all will be made gloriously new.