+++
title = "Law, Luther, and the Two Kingdoms"
author = "James Cooper"
date = "2016-12-31"
categories = ["Papers"]
tags = ["luther", "law", "law and gospel", "romans", "two kingdoms"]
+++

*This paper was recently delivered at Covenant Seminary for the annual conference of the student Theological Fellowship*

In the following paper, I will briefly outline the historical and literary background of Romans 3:19–26. Then, I will show how this passage informs our view of humanity’s plight under sin and the nature of Christ’s redemption. Next I will explore how these themes informed Luther's doctrines of the Two Kinds of Righteousness and the Two Kingdoms. Lastly, I will explore the ways in which one’s view of sin and its solution affects Christian engagement in the public square.

The claim of Romans to be written by the Apostle Paul (1:1) has never been a matter of serious dispute.[^1] His audience was the congregation at Rome, most likely founded by Jewish converts after Pentecost (Acts 2:10). In the estimation of Carson and Moo, Paul wrote to a Jew-Gentile audience, this mixing having taken place after the expulsion and subsequent return of Jews to Rome under Emperor Claudius.[^2]

Within the broader context of the letter, 3:19–26 falls subsequent to Paul’s universal condemnation of humankind, whether Jew of Gentile, under the Law or not. The climax of this universal condemnation occurs in 3:9–18, and the following section answers the natural question: if, with respect to righteousness, the Law serves only to condemn, how then may righteousness be attained? Paul answers this question through a careful explanation of the work of Christ.

Paul begins this section in 19–20 by again expounding the problem of sin, this time with respect to one’s orientation towards the Law. Because of the universal scope of the condemnation in v. 19, it may be tempting to take those “under the Law” (v. 19) to refer both to Jews and gentiles, but this need not be the case. The Jews are said in 3:2 to have been entrusted with the “words of God,” and the argument seems rather to be that, if the Jews are condemned, how much more so the unbelieving world.[^3] These verses are significant precisely for what they say to those given the Law explicitly, by the hand of Moses. When the Law speaks, it speaks so that mouths may be stopped (v. 19), and its hearers may know their sin (v. 20).

Paul’s words shed light on the extent of humanity’s plight under sin. The problem of sin is not simply a problem of ignorance. A lack of revelation from God is not sufficient to explain the lack of righteousness in mankind. If this were the case, then surely a direct revelation of God’s Law, as had been given the Jews, would be sufficient to make one and one’s people, righteous. A holy people, given God’s Law and the constant reminder of the prophetic word, had failed to be righteous because the Law was not given for righteousness. Sinful human beings, given knowledge of the truth, sin against God *despite* their knowledge of the truth. This is true *whatever* the degree of revelation received (cf. 1:18–19).

If sin is more than a problem of ignorance, but is in fact a problem of the *will*, then righteousness must come by some means other than a revelation of God’s Law. This is the first criterion which the salvific work of God must satisfy. The second criterion is that any work of God must be consistent with his own character. Verse 26 presupposes that God could not simply have dismissed sin out of hand. Sin carries with it the problem of corruption which inevitably leads to multiplication of itself, but also the problem of legal guilt which must be dealt with. It is precisely these two criteria which the work of Christ meets. The righteousness which comes by faith is manifested apart from the Law (v. 21), and Christ’s death is put forward in a sacrificial cast. Within the Old Testament worldview, it was precisely sacrifice that was intended to deal with legal guilt. The links between Christ’s atoning death and this legal framework are unmistakable, with specific references to his blood as being that which propitiates (v. 25).

Notable, however, is the way in which Christ’s death also transcends the legal framework. Righteousness is offered freely as a gift (v. 24), to be received by faith. The divine judge is also the gracious gift-giver. If God’s righteous character as judge prevents him from simply dismissing sin, then his loving character as gift-giver prevents him from simply dismissing sinners. The motivation for Christ’s sacrifice is not ultimately wrath, but love, and it is love for the whole world.

It was these basic insights, that the Law of itself is unable to cleanse either humanity’s guilt or inclination towards sin, that informed Luther’s doctrine of the Two Kinds of Righteousness. In his 1519 sermon of the same name, Luther outlined the basics of justification *sola fide* and the Christian’s subsequent holiness as a twofold consequence of the Christian’s personal union by faith to Christ’s person and work.[^4] Through faith the believer is united to Christ’s righteousness as an alien, justifying work, and as a righteousness which works itself out *in the believer* through concrete acts of love towards God and neighbor. The believer dies to the flesh and is reborn a spiritual person,[^5] that is, by the Spirit.

Luther’s ideas were revolutionary for the time, not least because, having re-imagined the relationship of the Christian to God and His Law, Luther also reconsidered the function of law in society generally, and the relationship of the free Christian to earthly laws and authorities. In what sense was the Christian, set free in Christ, bound to earthly institutions? This question Luther considered in his 1523 treatise *Temporal Authority: to What Extent it Should be Obeyed*, wherein he articulated most clearly what is known within Lutheranism as the doctrine of the Two Kingdoms.

Before continuing, I think a few remarks are in order. Firstly, it is my personal opinion that approaches to the Two Kingdoms as articulated in certain modern Reformed circles are not truly representative of Luther’s thought or the tradition which followed him. Certainly, one has to allow for development and translation across confessional lines, but the family resemblance is lost when one considers the precise way in which the kingdoms are defined, and the implications this has for Christian activity in the world. In particular, VanDrunen appears to associate the “redemptive kingdom” with particular activities, even going so far as to identify the “kingdom of heaven” with the church as institution.[^6] Luther, as I will explain below, defined the kingdoms in terms of Law and Gospel, not activities of the world and activities of the church. Secondly, one must consider the occasional and therefore limited nature of Luther’s theology. Luther’s stated purpose for writing *On Temporal Authority* was to correct certain misunderstandings of his earlier work and to instruct Christian princes in their own particular vocation. We may still, however, certainly draw implications and connect them with Luther’s wider thought in order to construct something like a “Lutheran” vision for society.

With these few caveats in mind, I will proceed with Luther’s treatise. Early on in the work, Luther defines the Two Kingdoms. Firstly, he defines the Kingdom of the World, which is the world as it exists under the dominion of sin. It is restrained, taught, and humbled by the Law. Secondly, the Kingdom of God is that which consists of “all the true believers who are in Christ and under Christ.” It is taught, governed, and upheld by the gospel.[^7] The one God rules temporally through rulers, and the other He rules spiritually through his Holy Spirit.[^8]

These definitions follow naturally from Luther’s understanding of the Two Kinds of Righteousness, and are an extension of the radical nature of salvation into the social sphere. The Christian is righteous by faith without respect to any law, whether of God or man. Furthermore, he is led inwardly by the Spirit to obey that which God desires. Love for neighbor is the guiding motivation for the Christian, not fear of punishment. Since the very reason for the existence of human rulers is to enforce the rule of law through the use of the sword, then the true Christian has no need either of human authority or temporal law.[^9]

On the other hand, the unbeliever is not born of the Spirit, and is not naturally inclined towards God or neighbor. The natural man is, as Augustine noted, curved inward towards the self, and requires the threat of the temporal sword as a check against the impulses of self-love. Temporal authority exists not for believers, but for unbelievers, who without the threat of the sword would otherwise descend into lawlessness and destruction.[^10] It is for Christians only in the sense that Christians also must live in the midst of the kingdom of the world, to which belongs the great majority of humanity, as Luther saw it.

It would be a misunderstanding, however, to conclude from this that temporal government is somehow an ungodly or sub-Christian institution. Temporal authorities are a part of God’s good creation, and as there is no realm of good human activity which is not honoring to God, it is especially fitting for Christians to participate in it.[^11] For the Christian, participation and support of government is an act of love towards neighbor. Christian rulers are to act justly as a service to their unbelieving subjects and fellow Christians who live in the midst of the kingdom of the world. Likewise, Christian subjects are to honor and obey their rulers as an act of love towards their neighbors, who depend upon the order and justice imposed by the temporal sword.[^12] In neither case is the Christian to use temporal power as a means of advancing his own cause or agenda, but only for the good of others.

Luther's ideas about the role of law and temporal authority in society may strike us as somewhat radical, though perhaps less so when they are considered as an ideal rather than a concrete description of reality. The old Adam still tugs at the heart of the Christian, pulling him towards his old allegiances,[^13] and even causing him at times to stumble into deep and grievous sins. Yet it is still the case that he is the citizen of another kingdom. Likewise, unbelievers, though instructed and even outwardly obedient to the precepts of just and godly laws, lack the true orientation of the heart towards God and neighbor that can only come about as a result of the regenerating power of the Holy Spirit. As noted in the exposition of Roman's 3 above, the problem of sin in humankind runs so deep that law cannot, of itself, solve it. Luther recognized the fundamental limitations of law as law in a world touched by sin, while also preserving its place as a means of God's governing of his creation.

As Christians engage in the public square today, the same mis-orientation towards the Law which Paul attempts to correct is the same that many take towards law today. Many Christians, as well as non-Christians, view and use the law as a means of moral reform. Election years are especially productive in bringing out this hope in political action as a means of bringing about societal change. Yet, under the reign of sin and death, law can never be a reliable instrument of moral and societal change. This was true of Israel under the Mosaic law; how much more so in modern societies, whose laws to greater or lesser degrees reflect God’s moral will? For Luther, such misplaced hope would have amounted to a confusion of the Two Kingdoms. While it is true that just institutions and laws can do much to restrain evil and even promote good in a society and in ourselves, true righteousness, both legal and actual, can only come by faith. The Kingdom of the World can never *become* the Kingdom of God, it can only be overcome. What this means for followers of Jesus is that outward works of service towards neighbor, advocacy for righteousness in the political arena, and even political office itself, are good and worthy vocations *especially for the Christian*. As a means of expanding God's Kingdom, however, such efforts can never be *fully* separated from proclamation of the gospel. Repentance, faith, true holiness, the coming of the Kingdom in all of its fullness, these are a work of God, and he has chosen Christians as witnesses and workers in this present age.

I have briefly treated only a few themes from this key text in Romans, and a small fraction of Luther's thought on Christian engagement in society. I have shown that sin is a moral and not simply intellectual problem, and therefore demands more than law as it’s solution. I explained Christ’s work as sacrifice and gift, and God’s motivation rooted in his love. I briefly outlined Luther's notion of the Two Kinds of Righteousness, and how his thinking on law and authority informed his doctrine of the Two Kingdoms. Lastly, I noted the limitation of law as a means of civic righteousness.

[^1]: D.A. Carson and Douglas J. Moo, *An Introduction to the New Testament*, 2nd ed. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2005), 395.

[^2]: Ibid., 396.

[^3]: See C.E.B. Cranfield, *The Epistle to the Romans*, vol. 1, International Critical Commentary (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1975), 195–96.

[^4]: Martin Luther, “Sermon on Two Kinds of Righteousness,” in *Word and Faith*, ed. Kirsi I. Stjerna, trans. Else Marie Wiberg Pedersen, The Annotated Luther, Volume 2 (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2015), 13–16.

[^5]: Ibid., 17.

[^6]: David Van Drunen, *Living in God’s Two Kingdoms* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2010), 133–34.

[^7]: Martin Luther, *Temporal Authority: To What Extent it Should be Obeyed*, ed. Jaroslav Pelikan, trans. J.J. Schindel, rev. Walther I. Brandt, Luther’s Works 45 (Saint Louis: Concordia, 1962), 88.

[^8]: Ibid., 91.

[^9]: Luther, *Temporal Authority*, 89.

[^10]: Ibid., 90.

[^11]: Ibid. 99–100.

[^12]: Ibid. 101–3.

[^13]: See the discussion of the progressive nature of sanctification in Luther, *Two Kinds of Righteousness*, 16–17.
