+++
title = "The Gospel in Ordinary Time (Luke 2:22-40)"
author = "James Cooper"
date = "2018-12-30"
categories = ["Sermons"]
type = "posts"
tags = ["Luke","Christmas","Epiphany"]
+++

*The following message was delivered on December 30, 2018 to the
congregation of [Trinity Prebyterian Church](https://www.trinityhinsdale.com/) in Hinsdale, Illinois. [click here for recording](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1xTJtwW_cx8JXsKAynZlHlYI2w9Eiu7G_)*

One of the curious things about growing up in the home that I did was our relationship to time. Lest you think I’m being deliberately esoteric, all I mean is that in the way we thought about time, organized time, used time, things were curious. They were curious because for the most part, time for us looked ordinary and boring. And I don’t mean that to sound negative or spiteful, I’m just making the observation that my days, months, years growing up looked perfectly ordinary. Every hour was spent in some little thing or other like homework or sports. Every day was spent at school, or for my parents at work. The week was divided into five days of not-so-fun, and two days of less not-so-fun. Vacations they came and went, but always according to that fickle master the academic calendar, who leaves you when you’re done with school then comes back to get you when you’re a parent. And so, in many myriad ways the way we related to time was dictated by things that were not particularly extraordinary. The one exception, and this is what was curious though not so surprising, was Christmas.

We didn’t follow any sort of church calendar or anything—nothing like that, but we did celebrate Christmas. And I suppose it isn’t all that surprising because for most people, even those that aren’t particularly Christian or decidedly not Christian, Christmas just kind of happens to you, like a force of nature. Thanksgiving comes, and boom there it is. Magic. The snow comes, trees come out, lights come up, the Christmas special for the Great British Baking Show comes out on Netflix. Magic. The world is so alive with warm fuzzy feelings and optimism. And if you are a Christian, it’s even better, because you know what it’s really all about. Maybe you’ve been here, maybe somewhere else. You’ve been following the story. You’ve been singing the hymns and reading the verses and listening to the sermons and it’s all somehow come together in this intensely spiritual magical way. Even if you weren’t here maybe you were somewhere else, and that too was magical. I was away on Christmas, I won’t say exactly where, but I was visiting a small town church up North Christmas, and they wanted to do something special. And as these things go, ambition outstripped available resources and it was all a bit corny. The choir was a little too small, the volunteer readers a little too unpracticed, the people around us a little too unfamiliar with the hymn picked out just for this occasion. But it was magical. And it was magical because it was Christmas, and you could feel the spirit in spite of and maybe because of the lack of professionalism. And maybe that all sounds a bit hyperbolic, but I mean it in a very sincere way, because some of the greatest moments of spiritual growth and insight have come to me around this time of year. There is something about the juxtaposition of the bitter cold and the charged spiritual energy of this time that has its way of waking us from spiritual slumber. At least, that’s how I’ve always felt, from about December first to December twenty-fifth. But the curious thing about spiritual high points and magical times that come every year is that they only come once a year. And then they’re gone.

The day after Christmas has always been really weird. On the one hand, it’s just another day. On the other hand, it really is just another the day. The previous day was not just another day. The previous day was amazing, and the twenty-four days preceding that day participated in its amazing-ness by way of joyful anticipation, but today—today is just a day. The tree is there, the lights are there, the presents, now open, are there. And Jesus he is still quite born, but things are different now. Things are ordinary again. Instead of seasonal affective disorder, there is post-Christmas ordinariness disillusionment disorder. The spiritual high cools. I would submit to you that perhaps one of the reasons that spiritual highs like the ones we get around Christmas are often so fleeting is that when we go back to the routine of ordinary life it is hard to believe that God could possibly inhabit and be at work in a world so uninspiring and at times positively discouraging. But our passage today suggests otherwise.

Our passage today comes from Luke 2 after the famous events of Jesus’ birth and are, by comparison, quite ordinary. There are no Shepherds in the field encountering choirs of angels. There is a boy, his mother, and his father, doing what everyone was supposed to do. Luke goes out of his way to emphasize that Mary and Joseph were fulfilling the Law in bringing their firstborn son, Jesus, to the temple. Certainly, there is a theological dimension to what is going on. Jesus must fulfill all of the Law in order to be our savior. But it also strikes us as somewhat mundane. The first few months, and in fact the entire life of Jesus, was still constrained by what everyone else had to do. He was a baby. He was circumcised. He went to the temple. He was a boy. He grew. He learned a trade. He made stuff. All in all a very ordinary Messiah; and it all begins here. But in this same passage, we encounter two people who see something extraordinary hidden under the veil of the mundane.

The first is Simeon. We aren’t told explicitly in the text how long, but we can infer that Simeon was waiting for a long time for the consolation of Israel, that is, Israel’s salvation. He would not die, the Lord said, until he had seen the Messiah. And so you can imagine that as Simeon got older, every day as he thought upon and prayed upon the promises of the Lord he would wonder to himself if today was the day.  Will I see the Messiah today? Will I see God working salvation for his people today? And finally, the day came. The Messiah came and Simeon sang this famous song, “Lord you are letting your servant depart in peace,” often known by its Latin title, the *Nunc Dimittis*. In other words, “now I can die in peace knowing that you have done what you said you would do all of these years that I have been waiting and all of these years that your people have been waiting, going as far back even as the prophet Isaiah,” so that yes, peace has come Simeon, but peace has also come, to God’s people.

In vv. 29–32, Simeon weaves together a number of prophecies from the latter part of Isaiah (roughly 40–60) describing the coming of the Messiah, the salvation of Israel, and the inclusion of the gentiles (that is, those who were not then a part of Israel). His eyes have seen this (v. 30), it is done in the presence of everyone (v. 31), and it is a light (v. 32). In other words, it is crystal clear to him that God is at work, and he is at work not just for the sake of Israel, but for the sake of the whole world. It is a glorious thing, and it is all laid upon the head of the infant Jesus who is, remember, still an infant. And he isn’t the only one who does this.

Anna the prophetess, like Simeon, isn’t someone we encounter elsewhere in the bible, but here she is in v. 36.  Like Simeon, she is presented in quite an ordinary way. She is presented as a prophetess, but nothing particularly remarkable happens. Like Simeon she had probably been waiting for a long time. We’re told that she is an eighty-four year old woman, had been a widow since seven years after her marriage, and had never ceased to be at the temple, meaning that she probably spent her widowhood at the temple. That is maybe somewhere is the region of 60 years of prayer, fasting, and coming the temple, waiting on the promises of God. And on this particular day she came to the temple, probably led there by the spirit like Simeon, and she saw the infant Jesus there, and with him, all the promises of God fulfilled. She had finally seen God do what he always said he would do, that is, save his people.  Overcome with joy and thanksgiving, she goes out into the streets to tell everyone that finally, redemption had come.

Two people, two stories, same child, same reaction–complete and utter amazement at the glorious workings of God, but why? Imagine for a moment that you’re not you; you are Simeon or you are Anna, and you have been waiting forty, fifty, sixty years under an oppressive Roman government for God to do something to show that he was still there, and he was still at work. Every day is the same: you pray, you wait, nothing changes; you pray you wait, nothing changes; you pray you wait; nothing changes; you pray, you wait, a baby shows up, nothing changes—at least not until after you are probably dead.

Remember that all of this thanksgiving, praise, and prophecy is directed at the still quite an infant Jesus. There was no reason, humanly speaking, to think that God would work his salvation through a man like Jesus, the son of a carpenter from nowhere remarkable, and there certainly was no reason, humanly speaking, to think so while he was still a baby. Even if Simeon and Anna had heard about shepherds and angels and magi from the Orient, so what? They came, and they went, and things were the same. Christmas was over, and what had been going on in the meantime?

Yet both Simeon and Anna spoke with such confidence that in Jesus God had certainly accomplished what he said he would do, namely, free his people from their bondage and make himself known to the whole world. Even before it was accomplished, it was accomplished. All they had seen was the infant Jesus, and they had already seen the whole thing. They had a way of seeing that was different from the way that most people saw things. They had a way of seeing that is oftentimes different from the way that you and I see things. And our gospel writer Luke gives us hints as to how they saw things, and how they came to see things in the way that they did, because Luke himself saw things in much the same way.

One of the remarkable things about the beginning of Luke, which many of you may have been reading or hearing about these last few weeks, is the way in which the ordinary is punctuated by the extraordinary. Things are never exactly the way they seem, though they really do seem to be so. There were shepherds abiding in a field, watching their flocks by night, pretty ordinary, boring stuff, and then bang! Angels, choirs, lights, glory, prophecy, and then… gone, quick as it came. Back to normal. Luke, as it were, pulls back the cosmic veil so that we, just for a moment, can see that what is happening is not the mundane story of a carpenter, his wife, and some shepherds. Angels, beings of immense power and might, beings with no reason to be interested in the trivial affairs of men, are interested in this. Behind the veil of ordinary life, of dull, hard, oppressive life, the angels are singing. And Simeon and Anna can see and they hear the singing behind the veil because they’re learned to listen. How?

If there is one thing that is clear about Simeon and Anna so far, it is that they were extremely patient. Both of them waited for substantial portions of their lives for promises whose fulfillment seemed highly unlikely. For neither of them, however, was this waiting a passive thing. When you and I think of waiting we think of standing in line, checking our phone and wondering when its going to be over, but for Simeon and Anna, waiting looked like lots of prayer, lots of fasting, and lots of hoping that today maybe, just maybe, might be the day. Notice how both Simeon and Anna are both hanging around the temple when this happens, and both of them are accustomed to doing so. The temple, God’s meeting with place with man is where they want to be as they wait for God the show up. Secondly, both of them demonstrated an utter devotion and a kind of single mindedness in seeing the promises of Lord fulfilled. Simeon is described as righteous and devout, and Anna had apparently used her widowhood as a means to devote her life to service at the temple and to pray ceaselessly as she waited for the salvation of Israel. Both show a focus on God and his promises that is unwavering. Thirdly, and this is merely hinted at, both have a relationship with the Holy Spirit. Simeon is given a promise and led to the temple by the Holy Spirit, and Anna, referred to as a prophetess and just happening to arrive at the temple at the right time, was also deeply acquainted with God’s Spirit. The picture we have of Simeon and Anna then is that of two people in active and intimate communion with God even as they wait and even as the world looks the same as it always had. It is this intimate communion with God that allows them to see behind the veil and see the mysteriously unfolding plan, whose glorious end is clear even as it is just beginning.

I asked us earlier to imagine ourselves as Simeon and Anna. It can be an interesting thought experiment to ponder what you and I might think if we were a part of the story; what we might do or say or think if we were hearing about these events as they were occurring. But I don’t think we really need to place ourselves in the first century, because the opportunity to test how we would have reacted then is available to us each and every day as we look out onto the world and we ask ourselves, has God accomplished what he said he would or not? And my own, honest, personal response is, “absolutely not!” The country is divided, the church is divided, Christians are publicly vilified and mocked in popular culture, I’ve always believed in public schooling but now I don’t know if I can trust my son there any more or not because I am afraid. China is clamping down on our brothers and sisters. the sea level is rising, and meanwhile, while all of this is happening, my relationship to time still hasn’t really changed since I was a child. My life is dictated to me by things I can’t really control, and that seem to have nothing really to do with anything remarkable. And against this onslaught of negative imagery, pessimism, and sometimes just plain complacency I have the images of a helpless infant who will grow up to be a helpless bleeding man on a cross. It sounds absolutely ridiculous, and I don’t think I’m alone in thinking or experiencing that from time to time. You can come up with your own particulars. This way of thinking is both as insidious as it is common because as human being living in a world filled with sin, the sheer weight, the inertia, of both the evils and even the simple seeming meaningless of life in the day to day seem like they must be met with something big, something spectacular, something glorious. This is the kind of thinking that leads us to despair. And for some in Jesus' day, this led them to reject, and ultimately crucify him.

Simeon predicts this, in vv. 33–35. He says that Jesus will cause many to rise but also many to fall. He is the stumbling block as we read elsewhere in the New Testament. He will be opposed, and his mother will have her heart broken, because ultimately, he will be killed. Not everyone in Jesus’ day wanted a humble Messiah. Not everyone expected a humble Messiah. I would venture to say that almost no one expected a Messiah from a little town and a carpenter’s family. Many of them wanted something far more glorious. They wanted a great political leader who would lead them out of the darkness of Roman rule into the glorious light of freedom and autonomy as an independent kingdom, just like they had before, and Jesus, for all his talk, just didn’t fit the bill. So they killed him, or at least they approved of it. This is why Simeon says that hearts will be revealed.

When Jesus first started his public ministry, there was a lot of initial enthusiasm. Jesus was saying some great things. He was doing miracles. He seemed to have authority. But when people remembered who he was and when it became clear that he was not the glorious king they were looking for, the people left, some probably in despair, others in anger. But those, who like Simeon, like Anna, like his disciples (eventually), who could see things differently—who could see things as they really were, these people stayed, and even some of them left him at the very end. The heart is revealed when our glorious expectations for God are met with the humility and humiliation of the cross.

Think about the last time something at work, or in your family, or just generally out in the world really upset you, or disappointed you, or caused you outrage. It isn’t really hard nowadays in the hyperconnected age we live in. I remember being in seminary when ISIS was in full swing and reading the reports that would come in (because we were required to read the news) of such and such number of Christians killed, or so and so group of Christians being forced to flee. And the temptation in those moments is to feel yes outrage, but also disappointment. God is asleep. Western culture is declining. I try to teach my high school students about goodness, truth, beauty, virtue, faith, hope, and love, and I don’t know that I can win when all the world wants to do is entertain them, especially my boys. God is asleep.

But he’s not asleep. He’s just not what I want. All of the images I have in my mind for what redemption might look like in the world center around success, power, fame, and glory, and when I have my glory-glasses on, of course a baby and cross look ridiculous. And they look even more ridiculous when I’m called to bear crosses of my own; to suffer like he suffered. But this is to see within the veil. This is to see only at the surface of what is really going on. Now, I’m not suggesting that the solution is to take off your glory-glasses and put on rosy-ones, so that every evil thing is really a good thing from the right perspective. Sometimes it really isn’t clear exactly what good will come out of the suffering we go through, even though we are assured that God works things to our good. For many of us it will remain mysterious until the day we die.

What I *am* suggesting is that even when the magic of Christmas has worn off, and the cares of life return and wear down on the soul, it is in intentional, intimate, prayerful, communion with God by His Spirit that he has given us in Christ and that works through ordinary and un-mysterious things like words, water, bread, wine, prayer, and the fellowship we have with one another, that the veil is pulled back and the angels sing to the glory of God for what he has accomplished in Christ.

Some of you have probably heard the list I’ve made and are already making your New Year’s resolutions; maybe you started last week. “Pray more. Read the Bible more. Don’t miss church because I woke up late more.” And lists are great, some of us, most of us probably, really need lists to actually get stuff done, but I don’t want us to lose sight of the fact that communion with God isn’t essentially a thing to get done, it is a gift; and it is only the cares of the word, the lust of our eyes, and the hardness of our own hearts that prevent us from taking it. Most of us, I don’t think, lack knowledge of what it would look like for you to be more intimate with God in 2019. If you do, just ask your neighbor, I’m sure he or she has about 5 different bible reading plans, prayer plans, devotionals, and e-mail lists you could try based on your schedule, flexibility, and whether or not this is the first time you are attempting something like this. Community and Discipleship groups are a means towards greater communion with God. Our problem is not a lack of knowledge or resources, for the most part. Our problem is a lack of resolve, a lack of motivation, a lack of heart, a lack of love for God in the ordinary times. It’s easy to love Christ on Christmas and Easter—not so much on April 15, when taxes are due. And Christ came to die for that, too, so that ordinary sinners like you and like me, rather than running a constant treadmill of indifference, then guilt, then fervent activity, then cooling, then indifference again, could experience real and last change, because we have experienced real and lasting peace. So please, make those lists, do them. Help me do mine. But remember that we do this not to obtain peace, but to drink daily from the well of peace we already have in Christ. This peace, this glimpse of glory that Simeon and Anna saw, is always and everywhere available to us, even as we wait to see it fully realized in all of its aspects at a time you and I may never see in this life. Christ has come, he has died, he has risen. Christ will certainly come again. Take off the glory-glasses, and in the dull and ordinary times, remember that salvation has is here.
