+++
title = "A View From Up High (Matthew 17:1–13)"
author = "James Cooper"
date = "2020-02-23"
categories = ["Sermons"]
type = "posts"
tags = ["Matthew","Transfiguration","Suffering"]
+++

*The following sermon was delivered on May 26, 2018 to the
congregation of [Redemption Prebyterian Church](https://www.redemptionpres.com/) in Palos Heights, Illinois. [click here for recording](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1MBEBlrRgKIOCI8ncqomjsLjGmosg0NJ7)*

Good morning, my name is James Cooper, I’m here visiting with my wife,
Madeleine, and our two-year-old son, Benjamin. We live in the city now
but until recently lived out in West Chicago and were members at Trinity
in Hinsdale, so it is my pleasure to bring you God’s word this morning,
and I hope to be of some service to you in the next thirty minutes or so
as we reflect on Matthew’s gospel together. Before we do that, though,
would you please join with me in prayer **\[pray\]**.

We’re in a section of Matthew’s gospel known as the Transfiguration—that
is to say, the time when Jesus’ physical appearance was transformed in
front of three of his disciples. This passage serves somewhat as a
transition from the earlier parts of Matthew which cover Jesus’ birth
and public ministry, to a time of increasing hostility, his arrest, and
ultimately his death. Because we are jumping right into the middle of
Mathew’s gospel, I think it might be helpful to set the scene a little
bit. Just a chapter earlier in Matthew 16 a few pretty big things
happen. At the very beginning of the chapter Jesus is with his disciples
and he asks them who people think he is. What do people say about me?
And they tell him. Everybody thinks you’re one of the famous guys we
already know about, like Elijah or one of the prophets, one of those
guys. In other words, you’re pretty great, Jesus, but you’re nothing we
haven’t seen before.

It is at this point that Peter speaks up and gives us the first hint
that maybe the disciples are starting to understand what is
happening—who Jesus is and why he came. Peter calls him the Messiah, the
Son of the Living God. Jesus would be the one to save his people. Jesus
was the one they had been waiting for. And Jesus blesses him, and
reminds him that this revelation did not come from anyone but God
himself. What a privilege. And yet, something is still missing in
Peter’s understanding, or rather, something still needs to change,
because right after this glorious scene where as readers we’re all
singing Peter’s praises and congratulating him on finally getting it, he
sticks his foot firmly in his mouth.

Maybe you have one of those friends that talks first and thinks later,
maybe you are one of those people—I’m sure we all are from time—well,
Peter was one of those people, and at times his boldness served him
well, like we were talking about just now. But when Jesus then announces
his coming suffering and death at the hands of the religious leaders
Peter says exactly the wrong thing. He denies Jesus to his face, “you
will *not* die.” It seems clear that following a suffering and dying
Messiah was not the gig that Peter had signed up for. And Jesus’
response was probably meant to shock him. “Get behind me, Satan.” Can
you imagine being associated with the devil by Jesus himself? “The way
to save my people is through suffering and death and you are in the
way—if you are not willing to let me suffer and even to suffer yourself,
get out of the way.” That had to have stung, and I’m sure Peter carried
that conversation with him on his way up the mountain at the beginning
of our passage.

Peter’s conversations with Jesus are rather dramatic, and they are meant
to be. They are illustrations of what all of us are inclined to think
following Jesus is all about. In the Western world so many people are
familiar enough with the Christian faith that we probably do not feel
personal embarrassment at believing in a God who suffered and died at
the hands of his enemies, if anything the embarrassment comes from
believing that God exists, whatever he did. I suspect, though, that for
most of us, what is more striking and pointed is the way in which at the
root, what Peter expected of Jesus, what Peter expected of God’s work in
the world, what Peter expected of his own life as a follower of Jesus
and the lives of his friends, did not at all match up with what Jesus
was called to and what Jesus was calling him and us to. More on that in
a moment, but as we ascend up the mountain with the disciples in this
story I think it would be helpful to have in mind those areas of life in
which we expect (or used to expect) life as a Christian to be amazing,
that are not looking to be so amazing any more, that are not looking
exciting or compelling or worth the effort anymore, that might even look
a lot like suffering. Why? Why does God work like that? Why is following
Jesus not more glorious? Why does being a Christian involve suffering?
That’s what Peter brought with him up the mountain.

After six days they went up to a scene that only makes sense in light of
Old Testament parallels, the clearest being Exodus 24, in which Moses
and Aaron go up a mountain, wait six days, there’s a cloud, and Moses
sees the glory of the LORD appear like a devouring fire. Elijah himself
endures great suffering for the sake of God’s calling on his life, when
in a time of need he experiences the presence of God on a mountain in 1
Kings 19. And here they are in v. 3 conversing with Jesus in his bright,
glorious appearance, as if to say, or rather to shout, two things:
firstly, that here, as Moses and Elijah stood in the presence of Jesus,
clothed in majesty, they again stood in the presence of God. Secondly,
that whatever anybody was saying about who Jesus was and what he was
about, Jesus was not *just* another Moses or *just* another Elijah or
just another anybody. To be fair, he was in some sense like Moses and
Elijah, and the gospel writers themselves play on this comparison
elsewhere, but he was *so* much more. He was not just a prophet sent by
God, he was God’s Son, which is confirmed in the same scene.

Peter’s response strikes us as a bit odd, and maybe even a little funny,
as though he doesn’t really grasp the seriousness of the situation, and
that’s probably right. The most charitable reading of Peter’s actions is
that the tents were a way of honoring Jesus and his special guests,
providing them shelter as they talked together on the mountain. The
irony is that the whole scene is constructed *for Peter*, to teach him
something, and he just can’t keep himself from taking charge, making a
plan, and talking. Notice that God actually has to interrupt him in v.
5. God repeats the words he spoke at Jesus’ baptism, and adds this,
“listen to him,” and the disciples fall on their faces. Now they
understand whose presence they are in. Why does God work the way he
does? Because he can. Because he’s God.

Putting it that way might conjure up in your mind images of parents
saying “because I said so” to unsatisfied children. As a teacher I often
asked my students to do things that they neither wanted to do nor
understood. But as an aspiring parent of a teenager and a former teacher
of teenagers I know that there are some things which can only truly
begin to be understood once they are experienced, and so there is trust
involved. The “because I said so” or “doing this assigned reading will
be good for you” lines only work when there is confidence that the once
giving the line is (a) competent and (b) truly loves us and desires our
good. It is a hard thing that Jesus calls his disciples to; to watch
their master suffer and die and then to suffer themselves. They didn’t
get it, Peter especially. But Jesus clearly shows his competency to
carry out whatever plan he wants despite what we think (he is God after
all), and in v. 7 he shows that he cares. He touches them and tells them
not to be afraid. He understands. He is, after all, about to go to his
death, for them and for us.

How many of us doubt one of those two things? Maybe not all the time and
maybe not the same one every time, but when life does not live up to our
expectations one of those doubts will probably crop up in one way or
another. Either God is incompetent or he doesn’t care. I’ve felt that,
frequently, often during times of major life transition, when nothing
ever seems to go quite according to plan. And maybe things make sense in
the end but until they do they really don’t. You unexpectedly lose a job
in which you really felt you were making a difference and have no idea
who you even are any more. You are forced to move and lose all
*meaningful* contact with the friends you used to love and were such an
encouragement to you. You set a goal for yourself and strive towards
holiness in a particular area for years, something that the world or
even other Christians don’t even think is a big deal, but you know it
is, and the fruit is so small and the progress so slow you wonder what
God must be up to. You are called to speak God’s truth in uncomfortable
or socially dangerous (for some, even physically dangerous) situations.
These are all trials which will shape you and will mold you into greater
Christ-likeness, but in the meantime it just feels like pain. Here Jesus
gives Peter an assurance of both his power and his care, before sending
him back down the mountain to face the suffering that will come. And we
need that assurance. God knows we need it. That is why he’s given us his
word and his sacraments, and why he invites us to pray with and for one
another, all of these things testify to the promise that God is at work
in Christ redeeming and sanctifying his people, and that this promise is
for you, whatever it might *look* like. It is in humble submission to
his word in whatever form it may come to us that we find our fears
stilled, and our doubts removed. Listen to his voice.

Of course, this doesn’t fully answer the question of why Jesus and God’s
people after him must suffer. In a sense, we went straight to the trump
card. Everything happens according to God’s plan. Answered. But whose
fault is it? Some of us want to know. This Jesus answers in an obscure
conversation about Elijah. The disciples ask him about the coming of
Elijah. They have already been thinking about Elijah since he appeared
at the top of the mountain, but now they are on the descent, and they
have questions about a prophecy in Malachi which predicted that Elijah
would come *before* people and events they now attribute to Jesus. Jesus
tells them that the prophecy was in fact fulfilled, if only they had
been paying attention. John the Baptist, who had been killed, fulfilled
Elijah’s ministry, and was himself Elijah, in a figurative sense. I’d
like to focus, though, on vv. 13–14, because it is here that Jesus
clearly attributes the suffering of John, himself, and by extension his
disciples, to unbelieving humanity. The first Elijah was sent by God and
was ignored. John the Baptist, the second Elijah, was sent by God,
ignored, and killed. Jesus, greater than Elijah, was ignored, and would
be killed, and all this because, v. 12, they do not recognize Elijah
(and Jesus) as who they really are, and because they do whatever they
please. In other words, suffering and death arise because of the
hardness of the human heart towards God’s messengers and towards his
truth.

My wife and I just celebrated our fifth wedding anniversary a month ago,
which means I haven’t been married long enough to know a lot of things,
but I have been married long enough to know few things— I think, maybe
in ten years I realize I knew nothing, but I think I know now that it
was helpful in the beginning over and over again in many ways and by
many people that marriage would be hard. And there was part of me that
probably part of me that didn’t want to believe it. Part of me wanted
that perfect, problem free marriage we all dream about from time to
time. But these were not pastors or friends or books that were trying to
scare me away from marriage or in any way deceive me, they were just
being honest, and they were being honest because they loved me and knew
that at some point, probably the week after the wedding if not the day
after, some argument or some disagreement, or some-thing might happen,
and they didn’t want me to be surprised. And when a week later we were
moving into our new apartment and our tastes were in tension with one
another, or when a few months later our personalities were in tension
with one another, or when a few years later our career goals were in
tension with one another—when the pre-marital counseling and the
theory was over and real life hit, and we were stuck with each other
because we had made promises to one another that could not be
broken—we weren’t surprised. When the suffering came, and marriage is
a daily death to self which is a kind of suffering—sometimes less and
sometimes much more—when the suffering comes it is not surprising. And
that doesn’t make marriage any less painful or hard, but it does make it
easier to trudge through the hard times, and to see God still at work
even in the midst of them. There is a kind of glory and a kind of beauty
that comes in the end and all throughout the suffering. Somewhere
between all the moves, all of the disappointment, caring for a child,
and putting up with a selfish, prideful, prickly husband, God has made
my wife more beautiful to me than she’s ever been, because he’s made her
more like Jesus. God works like that.

We understand from the passage, but it bears repeating again and again
that Jesus is not at all surprised at his rejection, and neither should
we be. It should not surprise us that people don’t want to hear what we
have to say about Jesus. It should not surprise us when outreach is so
difficult. It should not surprise us that friends, neighbors, and even
family members aren’t immediately excited to do an evangelistic bible
study with us. And if we really think about it, we should not be
surprised when that rejection takes on a tone of outright hostility.
Personally, I spend a great deal of needless mental energy and outrage
feeling righteous indignation about things on the news or things I
encounter out in the world that really shouldn’t surprise me. That’s not
to say we just shouldn’t feel the wrong-ness, of things—I’m not
advocating cynicism here, all I’m saying is that that for which you are
not prepared has the potential to crush you, and Jesus wants his
followers to be prepared. They’re off the mountaintop and back into the
world, and he wants to make sure they know what to expect, and when the
opposition and the suffering comes, either outside of us in the world or
inside of our own hearts as we struggle to die to our own sinful
desires, God as still at work and it is beautiful, even if we can’t
quite see it now.

Remember that at the beginning of this mountaintop journey Peter’s
problem was that his expectations were all wrong. But his expectations
didn’t come from nowhere; they were fueled by the desire to get and to
do exactly what he wanted—to see Jesus’ ministry grow and become
exactly what *he* wanted. Jesus was supposed to be the bigshot Messiah
on whose coattails he could ride to a high position in a new society.
Who wouldn’t want that? Who wouldn’t want to be part of the most
successful ministry in the nation. This was of course exactly the line
of thinking that Jesus’ enemies used, and why they ultimately concluded
that he couldn’t be the Messiah. Not promising enough.

Because we’ve moved so much over the past few years I’ve been a part of
many Christian institutions and churches, and they all have a certain
amount of drama. Sometimes it’s financial drama, sometimes it's personal
drama, sometimes it’s plain ol’ hypocrisy. Of course other people are
always the problem in church, right, it's never me. And I’ve had moments
when I’ve thought to myself, “how is God at work in and among such weak,
quarrelsome, ineffective, ordinary people?” And that’s putting it very
bluntly and hyperbolically, by the way: there’s no one church or person
in particular I’m thinking of that fits all of those descriptors with
total accuracy so don’t look me up and try to figure it out. It’s just a
composite of reasons why I think I know better than God. Peter thought
he knew better than God. There are lots of people that know better than
God how to call a people and redeem a world through things other than a
dying Messiah, messy churches, and suffering Christians. And of course
we’re all wrong, because he has done exactly that, and will continue to
do so until Christ returns.