+++
title = "For Whom Did Christ Come? (Mt 15:21—28)"
author = "James Cooper"
date = "2017-03-12"
categories = ["Sermons"]
tags = ["Matthew", "lent"]
+++

Delivered at the [Villages of St. Peters](http://www.vofsp.com/) in St. Peters, Missouri on March 12, 2017. [click here for recording](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B_fmE7Mo2KD0aENYMThwNFlzQ0E)


Good morning again everyone. Again, my name is James, I’m a student at
Covenant Seminary here in St. Louis, and I’m in my third and final year.
What that means for me practically is that this is the semester where,
if I haven’t already (which I haven’t), I need to find a job. Finding a
job isn’t always easy, of course, nor is it always simple. There are
lots of factors to consider: what our needs are, what kinds of duties I
will be expected to perform, and how my particular gifts will serve the
needs of a particular church. One of the most curious factors, though,
and every seminary student I know takes this into account, is location.
Urban, suburban, or rural; Northern, Southern, East Coast, West Coast,
Midwest, everybody has a preference, based on reasons I think most of us
would agree are reasonable. There is a certain culture that we’ve grown
up with or perhaps are interested in, that makes us a better or worse
“fit” for a certain area, or vice-versa. The danger of course, and I’ve
certainly felt this myself, is that regional preference can turn into
regionalism. It can tap into that **\[FCF\]** natural human propensity
to make distinctions between ourselves and others, and from those
distinctions make some people insiders—the good people, and others
outsiders—the bad people. I’m not from St. Louis, but I’ve been here
long enough to think that some things are really strange. And maybe I
don’t just think they’re strange. Maybe I think they’re bad, and I’m the
righteous one, because I get it. It’s insidious. And friends, it doesn’t
always work only one way. Sometimes we find ourselves, think ourselves,
on the outside. Maybe that’s you this morning. You’re here to hear about
God but your asking the very same question this text from Matthew’s
gospel leads us to ask **\[Big Question\]**: for whom did Christ come?
Another way to ask it: who belongs to the kingdom of God.

Truly there is nothing new under the sun, because in Jesus’ day he was
constantly running up against this same problem of the human propensity
to exclude others. There were those in Jesus’ day, especially religious
leaders, who, by establishing rules not given by God but fashioned
according to their own tradition, declared good law keeping insiders
like themselves to be in favor with God, and everyone else to be
outside. These were the Pharisees and the Sadducees, and Jesus has a few
confrontations with them just before and after our text, but in between
those confrontations comes this curious account of a Canaanite woman.

**\[Read vv. 21—22a\]** Right here at the outset, Matthew is trying to
tell us something about the peculiarity of the situation. Verse 22 is
the only instance in the New Testament when the word for “Canaanite” is
used. Canaanite was the name given to the people that lived around the
people of Israel in the Old Testament, and worshiped other gods.
Normally in the New Testament, non-Jews are simply referred to as
Gentiles, but Matthew calls this woman a Canaanite in order to allude to
this Old Testament setting.

Why would he do that? Well, as noted, earlier in chapter 15, after being
rejected in his own hometown, Jesus is confronted by the Pharisees, and
an interesting conversation about what defiles a person follows.
Immediately after this conversation, where should Jesus find himself but
talking to a woman of the Canaanites, the traditional enemy of the Jews,
and certainly considered unclean by the religious leaders of the day.
And yet this Canaanite woman displays more faith and understanding of
who Jesus is than any of his own people. She asks him for healing, which
is remarkable considering that there was a nearby temple dedicated to
the local god of healing. She has heard about his miracles and knows
that he has real power, not the gods of her people. She calls him Son of
David, which was a messianic title from the old testament, showing that
she understands his role and mission to save his people. In short,
despite her outward status as an outsider to the people of Israel, in
her heart she has believed in Israel’s God, and in Israel’s messiah. We
see that profoundly in the conclusion of this section, but even here in
these first two verses we see it. Matthew, it seems, is showing us
through this woman that Jesus, God’s own messiah, despite what the
religious leader’s thought, came to save those outside.

I grew up on the South Side of Chicago, which, if any of you know
anything about Chicago, has a reputation of being the not-so-great part
of the city. But I grew up in Hyde Park, which is a relatively safe and
wealthy part of the South Side, centered around the University of
Chicago. Growing up, then, I had rules about where I could travel, and
living on the Northwest corner of the neighborhood it was especially
important that I not travel too far North and West. Concerns about crime
aside. It was pretty clear that I lived in a totally different world
from my neighbors to the Northwest. There was an invisible barrier that
separated my neighborhood, the insiders near the University with all its
culture and extra police presence, from the outsiders, the rest of the
South Side with its poorer public schools and general unclean-ness.

Tyre and Sidon, the place where Jesus met this woman, was to the
Northwest of Jewish territory. It was Gentile territory. It was unclean.
They didn’t do the right things, worship the right God, have the right
parents, so why should anyone bother to associate with them or proclaim
to them the true God and the salvation offered to them through the
messiah Jesus? Jesus bothered. Jesus ventured outside of his own borders
to reach the outsider. Maybe you feel like an outsider this morning. You
don’t know the right things to say or the right things to do to make you
sound and feel like everyone else here. You don’t think, or maybe you
know you’re not a Christian. You’ve got questions you don’t think should
be asked, doubts you don’t want to talk about, resentment towards
arrogant religious people that have burned you in the past. Jesus came
for you. Jesus doesn’t care about your past or where you’re from or who
your parents are, he wants you to trust him, to place your faith in his
death and resurrection for you so that you, too, can be right with God.
What’s stopping you?

But what about the Pharisees? What about those people in his hometown
who rejected him? What about the God’s people in Israel? Had Jesus
simply forgotten his mission to the religious insiders, who because of
their zeal rejected their own messiah? What does Jesus say in vv. 23—24
**\[Read\]**? Jesus was sent to the lost sheep of Israel. What that
means is Jesus had a strong understanding of the scope of his earthly
mission. We know from his later instructions in Matthew 28, that after
his death Jesus desired for his followers, that is the church, to go
throughout the whole world proclaiming the good news of his death and
resurrection, but Jesus, being God in human flesh, could only travel so
far and reach so many people within the three year time-span of his
ministry. He had come as a Jewish man, a religious insider, to save
other insiders who for centuries had been waiting for their savior to
come, and in the gospels that is mostly what we see him doing. We mostly
see him proclaiming that the salvation which religiously inside people?
Is that surprising?

Jesus draws on the imagery of lost sheep here, as he does frequently in
the gospels. I know nothing about sheep personally, maybe some of you
do, but my understanding is that they are quite easily lost, and for
this reason require the constant oversight and care of a shepherd. If
left to wander, they will. Sheep are also pretty defenseless. They have
no natural defense against predators and so quite easily fall victim to
things that might kill them.

Sheep provide a pretty good picture of God’s people, which is why they
are often depicted as such. They wander, they go astray, they get lost.
They know who the shepherd is, they belong to him, but they wander. They
fall victim to things that can kill them. The pharisees, they fell
victim to religious pride and arrogance, which is deadly. Religious
people who have everything figured out and never do anything wrong don’t
need God. They don’t need a savior. That’s why they rejected Jesus, and
ultimately had him killed. Others in Israel knew God, but had a strong
sense that somewhere along the path they had wandered. As individuals
and as a people they had all going astray somewhere, disobeying God,
dishonoring God, failing to love one another. That’s the history of the
human race, and that the history of God’s people. Maybe that’s you this
morning. You know God, you know Jesus even, but you feel like you’ve
been wandering. Maybe it’s sin in your life or maybe you just feel
distant from God, but you feel like the insider not really sure where to
turn. Jesus came for you. Maybe you’re the Pharisee, sure you’re totally
righteous because of all your zeal in doing things for his kingdom, but
secretly you despise other people. Jesus came for you, too. Where are
you at this morning?

But what about Jesus’ harsh words? Those are still looming large aren’t
they? I’ve said Jesus came for outsiders, and yet he says his mission is
to insiders, and then he calls the Canaanite woman a dog. Doesn’t that
prove that Jesus was closed minded after all? First of all, it’s worth
noting how the passage is framed. We know that this woman is will be
accepted by Jesus, and in Matthew 8, Jesus specifically heals a gentile
and praises him for his faith. Secondly, the word for dog here is not
the usual word for dog here, but an affectionate term for a household
pet. We might still think this is harsh, but considering that it was
common in that day for Jews to refer to Gentiles with a much more
insulting word for dog, Jesus may be making a point about the relative
closeness and clean-ness of this woman in relation to God’s people.

In those days, dogs simply wandered the streets. That may surprise us
because of how we think of dogs, but it is actually still true today
that in many countries dogs are not something you really want around,
and packs of dogs are probably not something you want to see. They’re
wild, they’re scavengers, they’re unclean.

That’s how Jews thought of Gentiles, but that’s not, clearly, how Jesus
thought. And so, it seems, Jesus was giving this woman a kind of test.
“What will she say if I simply note that my mission is to the Jews?”
Answer: “That may be the case, but it is to the Gentiles also.” This
Canaanite woman knew that God’s purposes for his people were never just
to be a blessing for themselves, but to spread that blessing to the
whole world. That was what Abraham, the father of Israel, had been
called to, and the blessings of inclusion, of being an insider, were
open to everyone. The Canaanite woman, somehow, knew that, and she
trusted in Jesus as the one through whom a real, vital, relationship
with God was possible. How does Jesus respond? He praises her faith, and
grants her healing, which in the gospels is often a sign of the inner
healing that is forgiveness of sins and a restored relationship with
God.

Insider, outsider, religious person, not religious person, the story of
the Canaanite woman shows us that **\[Big Idea\]** Christ came for all.
The kingdom is for those who grasp Christ by faith. It is by faith that
the outsiders become insiders, and the ones who think they’re insiders
or doubt they’re insiders are restored again to God. We’re in a season
of Lent now, which historically is a time to contemplate where our
hearts are with God. I’d encourage you to consider Christ and his death
on the cross, and what that means for your status before God. Are you
living by faith? Are you still struggling to believe that his death
really could be for you? Have you been growing cold? Be encouraged. He
came for you. He is patient; so patient he died on a cross for sinners
like you and like me. Let us pray to him now.
