+++
title = "Is Money Evil?"
author = "James Cooper"
date = "2016-10-23"
categories = ["Sermons"]
tags = ["topical", "money"]
+++

Delivered at [CityLife Church](http://citylifetc.org/) in St. Paul, Minnesota on October 23, 2016. [click here for recording](http://citylifetc.org/sermons/?sermon_id=336)

## Introduction

You will see our texts in your bulletin, we have a few today. If you will please turn to the first one. That is 1 Timothy 6:6-10. A few years ago I was faced with the choice between pursuing a call to ministry and a career in finance. I’ll admit that while finance and specifically mutual fund management is a good worthy calling, and one that any Christian with statistical ability and an interest in markets should consider, it wasn’t for me. For me, the call to ministry was quite strong, and I already had older men and peers affirming that indeed it was something I should pursue. And yet the appeal to do something else was still there because, especially as someone about to be married, the allure of a lucrative career in finance was strong. My dad was in the industry, so I knew exactly how much money I could be making in a just a few years. I could imagine what my wife and I could do, where we could live, how many kids and dogs and cars in our house. But that wasn’t to be because over time God showed me that it wasn’t the career I was after, I knew guys like that. What *I* was after was the money.

I have to admit that as I approach today’s topic I do so with some fear and trepidation. I do that not because the thing under consideration is scary in itself so much as it is something which sits near and dear to the heart of many of us, including me. And even those of us who may not have felt a little discomfort when we saw the title of the sermon in this morning’s bulletin I think will still admit that what we are going to consider this morning is a sensitive topic. Today we are going to talk about money. **\[FCF\]** For many of us, thinking about money stirs up all kinds of emotions. Money has the potential to be a source of worry and shame, or comfort and pride, or all of these depending on where we are or who we are with. **\[COR\]** Some of you are students, unsure of what the future holds. You have a lot of hope that your schooling will pay off, but in the mean time it looks like a lot money going out and not nearly enough coming back. Others of you are out of college, maybe you’re newly married or have a young family. You too wonder about the future. Whether you will have enough to provide for food, clothing, and school. Maybe you’re already thinking about college and retirement. You’ve probably been encouraged to do so by older people in your life. Maybe you’re older, more financially secure, but you still worry. Maybe you worry about yourself, maybe about others you love, whether they will have enough, whether you can or should give them enough. Maybe you secretly compare yourself to others and wonder what life would have been like if you had made different decisions, more lucrative decisions.

If money causes us so much stress and temptation in life, even making it harder for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven, Jesus says. then it is natural for us to ask the question, \[**Big Question**\] is money evil? Before we do that, will you please pray with me?

## Main Point 1: Why do we love money?

\[Read 1 Tim 6:6-10\] Timothy uses a phrase here, perhaps many of you have heard it before in a slightly different translation: the love of money is the root of all evil. Doesn’t that answer our question right there? Evil springs from an evil root, therefore money is evil. Right?Well no, because Paul says not money, but the *love* of money is the root of all evil. But what is love of money exactly? What does it mean to love an abstract thing like money? Paul gives a few clues. He says that those who love money are not content. They desire to be rich, and because of this they plunge into many foolish and harmful desires, and they destroy other people. In other words, they regard only themselves and their own needs and desires. In fact, the particular people Paul was talking about were supposed ministers who were only in the ministry for financial gain. And they were teaching falsely, probably because something about the gospel was too offensive, and it would have threatened their paychecks.

There was a man I knew in college who worked summers at a coffee shop to provide for extra expenses during school year. He got along well with the owner despite their differing personalities and perspectives on life, but one day this man, who is a Christian, discovered that it was regular practice of the baristas there to lie to customers. You see, any of you who have worked at coffee shops know that not many customers order decaf. If you make a batch in the morning it tends to sit there mostly full until it get thrown out. So to avoid this, we would simply make decaf americanos to order, since there would then be no waste. Well the shop wasn’t doing well, so one day the owner decided that rather than waste everyone’s time and money on a very small segment of the market, she would just stop buying decaf beans altogether. Not one to lose any customers, though, she simply instructed everyone, when asked to make decaf, simply to make regular coffee, and water it down, so that it tasted more like decaf. Now that may be offensive to those of you who drink decaf, but it was even more offensive to this Christian man who was being asked to lie on a regular basis and possibly even deliver caffeine to those who really shouldn’t have any. When he confronted his boss, he was found himself in a high stakes poker game with his job on the table and an unsympathetic boss. It had been a temptation for him not to say anything, and faced with the possibility of losing work, to simply drop the issue and sacrifice his integrity anyway. He stood his ground, and luckily for him, the boss was bluffing, and didn’t really want to lose a now experienced barista. The temptation though, had been real, and it had been strong.

Most of us, if we love money, and I think we do from time to time, certainly don’t love money itself. Sheer quantity of money in our wallets or in the bank, while maybe a source of pride, isn’t particularly useful to us *intrinsically*. Perhaps we love the cool, new, and exciting things we can buy with money, but novelty soon wears off, as many of us have probably experienced. We cannot take any of it with us Paul says in v. 7. I’m willing to bet that many, if not most of us, if we examine our hearts, love money because it gives us security. We seek it and hold onto it because without it, who will take care of us? Is that you today? Our Lord says in Matthew 6 that God feeds the birds of the air through they neither sow nor reap. How much more will he not provide for us, his children? Paul has very modest desires in v. 8, doesn’t he. Food and clothing, and he will be content. God knows what we need, doesn’t he? That’s not to say that bad things will never happen to you, but if God sent his only son to die for the forgiveness of your sins, to show how deep is his love for you, why would your default stance towards money be not to trust him?

## Main Point 2: Why do we have money?

So am I saying, then, that we should just give up all of our money and leave it up to God? Take vows of poverty and practice contentment with little means and the charity of others? I’m going to say no, but first I think it will be helpful if take a little excursis into the question of why we have money in the first place, and to do that I’m going to read from Genesis.

\[Read Genesis 3:17-19\]. This chapter in Genesis tells of the fall of men and women into sin, and specifically the curses that befall them as a result of their disobedience. Adam and Eve ate of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and as a result, the ground itself was cursed, and with it, the work of their hands. Jack Collins notes that in v. 18, the curse of thistles is not simply there to note the appearance of something which did not exist before. Thorns and thistles have uses as a source of food for many animals. What is unique about v. 18 is the way in which thorns and thistles hinder farming and in a sense come to stand for the unfruitfulness which will now plague all human labor. There is a certain futility to work. Adam sweats (v 18), and yet the land does not produce all that it once could. Genesis 3 is describing a little bit of what Economists call economic scarcity, and it is the reason (humanly speaking) that money exists. Human labor and the earth itself cannot provide everything that all of us need or desire, and our desires themselves are often flawed. And so we all must choose. All of us together with our limited time and labor and goods are constantly faced with the choice, “what must I give up in exchange for what I need or desire,” and money mediates that exchange. If any of you are interested in seeing me justify my degree I can prove to you after the service that money is better than barter in an economy with more than three goods. But all that is to say that money is a result of Fall, not in the sense that money is itself evil and we should have nothing to do with it, but that money is a way that we have all collectively dealt with life in a world that seems unnaturally limited. Because it is.

One of the most interesting things I cam across as a student is that in the last few years there have cropped up essay writing services, aimed primarily at college students. What they will do is, for a small fee, write an essay or paper any upcoming assignment you give them, and because it is an original work and simply something copied out of a book, it is not detectable by the normal means of spotting plagiarism. In fact, when you submit the assignment to these services for writing, you must also specify the desired grade that you hope to receive on this paper, so as not to raise the professors suspicion by turning in something completely out of character.

For a small fee a student can sacrifice academic and moral integrity for more time to other things, and I’m not making a comment on what those other things are, but an exchange is made, both in terms of tangible goods the student can no longer buy and intangible things like time and integrity. Because money mediates exchange, the way we spend it reveals something about our character, doesn’t it. It reveals something of what we are willing to sacrifice and for what. What sort of exchanges does your bank account represent? What are you giving up, and what are you gaining in return?

## Main Point 3: How should we use money?

I’ve been asking a lot of questions, and perhaps it has left you wondering, “how exactly should I use my money, then?” Far be it from me to tell you exactly how you should use your money. I have my own ideas of how I should use my money, but the specifics really do depend on the person. But the Bible does give us general direction to orient our thinking and spending. In fact, the Bible gives us two very big principles that should govern all of our conduct: love God, and love your neighbor. Jesus called these the greatest of all the commandments, and perhaps because, more than any others, they define what it means to have godly character, rather than to simply take godly actions. They define what it means to be Christ-like, even in our use of money.

One of the disadvantages of such broad guidance of course is precisely its lack of specificity. However, the Bible itself in applying these principle through further legislation, illustrates these principle in action, precisely in the realm of economics.

Firstly, the command to honor God \[Read Deut 14:22-23\]. In those days, as you may know, all of God’s people were commanded to give a tenth of all the increase of their labor, and dedicate it to God every year. And what they were to learn from this and remind themselves by this year after year that it in fact God himself who gave the increase. Offering back to God what could otherwise be stored away for other purposes honors Him because it acknowledges that He provides, and we are simply stewards of His gifts. We do not formally tithe today, but the earliest Christians did give to the work of the church in a similar Spirit. Trusting God with the increase given to them rather than storing it away, and that is something we do today. But I’m not just talking about giving to this particular church. What I think the principle behind the Old Testament tithe encourages us to do is think about what areas of our lives God is calling us to give of our resources, that He has given is, to further His work. It could very well be a desperately needed monetary donation. It could be volunteering our time. All of us have gifts from God, and it honors him when use them for Him first.

Secondly, loving our neighbor. \[Read Leviticus 19:9-10\]. This section of Leviticus introduces a number of ways to love our neighbors with respect to money. Verses 9-10 introduce the gleaning laws, which may seem obscure to most of us. We don’t own farms, so how are we supposed to leave a bit for the poor and oppressed? But I think we can see the principle, which is that we ought to have a mind for the poor and specifically set aside some of our resources for the relief of the less fortunate. And it is not an *ad hoc* decision. This was not a moment of overflowing compassion that happened once. It was a conscious decision, year after year, to provide for the needs of the disadvantaged. For us, fieldless though we may be, it means that the poor are not an afterthought. They are, in fact, a priority. Again, I’m not telling you who you should give to or what causes to support, simply to ask, “who are the poor that God has placed in your life to serve?”

There are many more examples we could use to illustrate what loving God and neighbor with our money looks like, but I hope we can begin to see is that God desires for us is not simply that we would be rule-followers, but that in our use of money we would be shaped by love. The we would not love money, but love God and others with money: that we would be Christ-like with our money. And God does and is doing that in our lives. If you are a Christian, Luther (drawing on Paul) writes that Christ’s righteousness takes root in your life and bears fruit towards Christ-likeness. This world is confusing. We have many difficult and confusing decisions to make, not least of which is how to think about and what to spend our money on. The allure, and the distress that money brings are strong, but the love of Christ both for us and through us is stronger. **\[Big Idea\]** We know that our money is a gift from God, and in Christ He gives us the love with which we love God and love others with our money.
