+++
title = "A Day of Solemn Rest"
author = "James Cooper"
date = "2020-03-15"
categories = ["Sermons"]
type = "posts"
tags = ["Exodus","Decalogue","Sabbath"]
+++

*The following sermon was delivered online on March 15, 2020 to the
congregation of [Boulevard Presbyterian Church](https://www.blvdpres.org/) in Oak Park, Illinois. [click here for recording](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1PDYzyAWQqi9cS_FMA_URHwUBRbC7B9lC)*

Good morning. My name is James Cooper. For those of you who don't know
me, I'm the assistant director of ministries here at Boulevard and
graduate of Covenant Theological Seminary in St. Louis. It is my
pleasure to bring you the word this Lord's Day morning, particularly as
we reflect, in some sense, on what it is we're even doing.

As I give this sermon, the world is in the midst of uncertainty, our
communities and schools and our own church is are the midst of
uncertainty. Our families are in the midst of uncertainty. All of this
is to say that we are all very busy. Not the kind of busy that we
usually think of with lots of work and activities and vacations and
stuff for kids and meeting with friends—though I’m sure many of us still
have plenty of that, what I am speaking of is a different kind of
business arising from the constant burden of decisions that each of us
must make as we are flooded with a constant barrage of new situations
and new information about those situations constantly arising. Some of
us are scared, some of us are upset, some of us are annoyed, but I
suspect that none of us have been idle in the past week or so. Reading,
thinking, praying, planning, deciding, and acting, all to keep
ourselves, our communities, families, and our neighbors safe and secure.
Much of life is this way, and has been, even before the events of the
past few months, even before new words entered our vocabulary. The work
of our hands for the sake of our God and our neighbors and all very
good, but God also calls us to rest. The Sabbath command is about much
more than organizing ancient Israel’s calendar and as we examine the
fourth commandment today I would like us to be thinking about those
areas of life that cause us the most anxiety, that cause us the most
business, that take the most of our time and our energy, and consider
what it might mean to rest from and in the midst of those things. I hope
to help us do that today, but before I do, would you please pray with
me. **\[pray\]**

The fourth commandment, like the other ten commandments was given to
God’s people after their exodus from Egypt, and it was to be a
remembrance of their deliverance from Pharaoh—a perpetual sign of God’s
mercy in rescuing them from slavery and setting them apart in a land of
their own to be his people. This is not explicitly stated here, but it
is stated in the repetition of the commandment in Deuteronomy 5. Here
God gives slightly different reasoning, and I’ll come to that in a
moment. But the way that the Sabbath, that is one day in seven set apart
for the worship of God and a ceasing from labor, functioned was as part
of an entire system of feasts and festivals (often mentioned together
with the Sabbath), that had the effect of both reminding the people of
God’s work in redeeming them, but also much more. The entire Old
Covenant calendar from the weekly Sabbath to the year of jubilee every
fifty years, the way in which time itself was structured all revolved
around God. I want us to pause and think for a moment about what that
communicated to the people who lived by that calendar. Every seventh
day, every new moon, every seventh month, every seventh year, every
fiftieth year; you don’t get to decide what to do on those days; those
belong to God. And it wasn’t as though the period in between any of
these things was long enough to leave the impression that the other days
*didn’t* belong to God. Their impact was significant enough that after
living under this system long enough, one would have gotten the feeling
that in fact it all belongs to God; your time belongs to God, because
*you *belong to God. The things that rule our calendars tend to make us
feel that way

This was particularly true of the weekly Sabbath, which is emphasized
more than any other holy day in the Old Testament, and its true of us
when we take a day out of our weeks to gather together to worship our
God and receive his gifts in Word and sacrament. If you’ve been a
Christian for any length of time have you thought about how unusual that
is? Maybe some of you have. It is something we do that nobody else does;
it is a distinctive marker of Christ’s church that on every Sunday, the
first day of the week and the day on which he was raised from the dead,
we gather together to worship him. In a pluralistic, hyper-connected
world that always expects us to be doing something else, that can be
hard to do. And of course, that’s exactly the point. Your time belongs
to Christ, because you belong to Christ. You don’t belong to your work,
or your email, or your newsfeed, or whatever else is constantly
demanding your attention the rest of your week. You belong to Christ;
and *his* yoke is easy and *his* burden is light.

Which brings me to my next point about rest. If the first reason God
gave the Sabbath command was to set his people apart as *his, *the
second, and really the first in terms of priority is that the Sabbath
was given that we might seek our rest in him. That’s the reason given
here in Exodus 20. God rested from *his* labor and work on the seventh
day, so his people ought to rest from *theirs*. This raises a few
questions immediately, one of which is, what does it mean for God to
rest? God does not get tired or fatigued or need a brain break, so what
is it that God means? To answer that, we should go back to the
beginning. The command itself begins with the word remember, suggesting
that the idea of the Sabbath was not entirely new, but was in fact a
principle that already existed, and the reason God gives for the command
is rooted in creation itself. When God created the world, he did so in
six days, and on the seventh day he rested. This simply means that he
ceased from his creative activity of the previous six days, but it does
not suggest that he did nothing. The Psalms suggest that God’s resting
or sitting ought are most naturally connected with the idea of his
sitting on a *throne*, that is, his rule, power, and dominion over what
he has made. And in his throne room his people worship at his footstool
(Ps. 99:5). This connection between God’s rest on the seventh day, God’s
rule, and the worship of God is how the Sabbath command is developed
here in Exodus and throughout the Old Testament, but what does that say
more specifically about how *we *are to rest?

Firstly, the fact that the sabbath was present in creation and that the
later command was rooted in creation suggests that there is a principle
at work that applies to us as creatures, and specifically as those
created in God’s image. Adam and Eve, as they worked and labored in the
garden were given a sign of God’s rest and dominion which they too were
to participate in. God sits enthroned in heaven governing all the works
of his hands. They too, as God’s image, were to enjoy an *enthronement*
over creation, a kind of worshipful, glorious, fellowship with God and
creation that cannot even be fully described because it has never been
experienced. For, as we know, Adam and Eve sinned, and lost for us that
rest we were created for.

Secondly, after the fall the rest of the seventh day came to signify
something slightly different. It came to signify the rest given in
redemption, and that’s what it signifies here in Exodus. The rest which
God was giving his people in the land, free from the oppression of
Egypt, free to worship the true God undisturbed, and free to pursue the
holy and righteous lives they were created for. It was a picture of
God’s physical redemption of his people from slavery, but it was also a
picture of God’s ultimate redemption of his people from the slavery of
sin. This is how Jesus and the New Testament authors interpret the
significance of the sabbath. Jesus refers to himself as “Lord of the
Sabbath” in all three synoptic gospels, and the apostle Paul in the
letter to the Galatians and the Colossians teaches that the Old
Testament calendar including, it appears, the sabbath, pointed forward,
ultimately, to the redemption of the world in Jesus. The author to the
Hebrews also makes this connection in chapters 3 and 4, where he warns
his readers not to fall away from the rest promised to them in Jesus.

To rest then is not merely to cease from working. It is, in fact, to
live by faith. It is to remember that this world is not all there is. It
to remember that God is enthroned and that he is working even now, in
the midst of our business, uncertainty, and best efforts to secure for
*ourselves* what only God can give. It is to remember that Christ has
redeemed you from the curse of sin and that you are no longer a slave to
it. It is to live as one who has been called out of darkness and into
God’s glorious light. It is to live as one who has hope; as one who will
one day reign with Christ who even now sits on his glorious throne.

There are so many ways the world, the flesh, and the devil would seek to
distract and to rob of us that rest, and it can come in many forms. It
might be a period of disobedience, or distraction, or overwhelming
anxiety or sickness. It might indifference or the feeling that God’s
help is not necessary in this life. All of these things tempt us to rest
our hearts in other things, which is really to remain restless, as St.
Augustine wrote. The sabbath rebukes such foolishness, and invites us to
seek rest in very practical ways.

The first practical way you can seek the rest that only God can give is
to go church on Sunday. It was on Sunday that the early church met to
hear the word, take the offering, break bread together, and encourage
one another in the faith. It is on Sunday that you will gather together
with your brothers and sisters, regardless of what happened this week
and regardless of how you feel, and you will worship God, hear from the
Word he has given you, and confess with your lips and your actions that
he is God and you are not. There will of course be times when that is
impossible, or extraordinary circumstance for unusual accommodations.
But we need a literal, embodied day of worship and rest. God knows that,
and set it as a pattern for us even at the creation. You need that kind
of disruption in your life. You probably need even more. I certainly do.

The second practical way you can seek God’s rest is to limit activities
on Sunday that hinder worship, and to engage in activities that reflect
the redemption and rest we have in Christ. These include things like
prayer and reflection, but also things like acts of mercy. Much of this
is inherently subjective, and I mean it to be. The apostle Paul in
Colossians 2 warns us not to be overly prescriptive or judgmental in how
we approach any day, even a day set apart by the church for worship.

The third practical way you can seek God’s rest is to remember that the
day of rest exists not only for itself, but is a sign of the rest and
the hope we experience in all of life. To rest in God does not begin and
end on Sunday, but from Sunday to Sunday. Sunday worship is an obviously
good practice, but I would encourage us all to also find other habits
and patterns of life, either individually or corporately, that snap us
out of our self-sufficiency, and remind us that God is in control, we
are *his* people, and that our hope is not in the works of our own
hands, but in the God who delivered us and, despite whatever chaos you
are experiencing now, despite whatever hardships the church is and will
certainly experience in this time before Christ returns, will certainly
deliver us on the last day into a final and glorious rest with all the
saints past, present, and future. Please pray with me. **\[pray\]**
